THE FATHERS OF THE CHURCH

A NEW TRANSLATION

VOLUME 59
THE FATHERS
OF THE CHURCH

A NEW TRANSLATION

SAINT AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO

THE TEACHER

THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL

GRACE AND FREE WILL

Translated by
ROBERT P. RUSSELL, O.S.A.

(De magistro)
INTRODUCTION

THE SHORT BUT HIGHLY SIGNIFICANT WORK, entitled The
Teacher, is next to the last in a series of Dialogues
begun at Cassiciacum, near Milan, where Augustine
had gone in the autumn of 386 to prepare for baptism. The
present Dialogue reproduces, at least in substance, discussions
held with his son shortly after their return to Tagaste in 388
and is the only one in which Adeodatus is the sole inter-
locutor: In The Confessions Augustine describes the origin
of the work as follows: “There is a book of mine called The
Teacher in which Adeodatus himself converses with me. You
know, O God, that all the thoughts expressed there as coming
from the second party to the Dialogue are his own, though
he was only sixteen years old."? The actual composition of
the work, which may have been intended as a literary memorial
to this precocious young man, is commonly assigned to the
year 389, not long after the premature death of Adeodatus.
The central theme of the Dialogue is succinctly stated in the
Retractations, a chronological review of the Saint’s works, ex-
clusive of Sermons and Letters, composed between 426 and
427. "During this same period," he writes, "I composed a
book called The Teacher where, after some discussion and
inquiry, we find that it is God alone who teaches men knowl-
edge, all of which is also in accord with what is written in the
Gospel: ‘One is your teacher, Christ.'"? Although the focal

1 Adeodatus was present at the discussions recorded in The Happy Life,
composed at Cassiciacum to mark Augustine's birthday on November
13. In it Augustine refers to him as follows: "My son, Adeodatus, the
youngest of us all, was also with us. Unless my affection deceives me,
is talent gives promise of great success” (1.6).

2 Conf. 9.6.14.

3 Retract, 1.12.
4 SAINT AUGUSTINE

problem concerns the role of the teacher and the function of
signs and language, the discussion quite logically leads to a
consideration of the origin of man's intellectual knowledge.

In general, however, the Dialogue is given over to the refu-
tation of the view that signs and words can of themselves
engender truth in the mind of the pupil or ordinary listener.
At first it might appear that Augustine's entire line of reason-
ing is directed against the very institution of teaching as this
is commonly understood and accepted. Nothing could be
further from his true purpose, and, indeed, the lesson of the
Dialogue would be lost if one were to infer that the role of
the teacher has been rendered superfluous or negligible. For
it is precisely by the kind of skillful and timely questioning on
the part of the teacher, so well exemplified in The Teacher
itself, that enables the pupil to discover the truth for himself.
And if Augustine stresses the instrumental role of the human
agency in learning, it is only to bring into greater relief the
central thesis summarized by Adeodatus at the conclusion of
the Dialogue, namely, that it is Christ, the “indwelling Truth”
who alone teaches men truth.

The epistemological import of this conclusion is significant,
representing, as it does, an important and decisive moment in
the history and development of Augustine’s celebrated doc-
trine of “divine illumination."4 In two earlier dialogues, Solilo-
quies and The Greatness of the Soul, there is an apparent
tension between vestiges of a Platonic reminiscence and vague
adumbrations of his later and definitive teaching of illumina-
tion. In the present Dialogue the latter is clearly delineated
for the first time in those essential aspects which find their
fuller development and classical expression within the rich

4 This is particularly noticeable in the Soliloquies where the notion of
"illumination" is dearly suggested (1.8.5) , while Platonic reminiscence
is implied in a later passage (2.20.85). In a letter to his friend
Nebridius, composed during the same year as The Teacher, Augustine
seems to accept the doctrine of reminiscence (cf. Ep. 7.1.2).

THE TEACHER 5

psychological context of that great masterpiece, The Trinity.®
All further traces of the Platonic doctrine disappear, except
for the term “memory,” which Augustine appropriates in a
sense altogether different and original.

When one considers the importance of this work in the
Middle Ages as well as its valuable pedagogical insights and
its relevance to modern semantic inquiry,’ it is not difficult to
appreciate the lasting influence of this rich and stimulating
Dialogue. The fact, too, that contemporaries of Augustine
preferred to call him Magister may well have been inspired
in part by this delightful encounter between so loving and
gifted a father and a son of great but unfulfilled promise.

The present translation has been made from the critical text
of G. Weigel, published in the Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasti-
corum latinorum (Vienna 1961). In the present work, as well
as in the remaining works of this volume, Scriptural quota-
tions follow the Challoner revision of the Douay Bible for
the Old Testament and the Confraternity of Christian Doc-
trine Edition for the New Testament. Occasional minor
adaptations have been made wherever warranted by Augus-
tine’s own reading of the biblical text.

5 In chapter 15 of Book Twelve—a locus classicus for his teaching on
"illumination"—Augustine expressly rejects the theory of reminiscence
proposed in Plato's Meno. “But we ought rather to believe,” he says,
“that the nature of the intellectual mind is so formed as to see those
things which, according to the design of the Creator, are subjoined to
intelligible realities in the natural order, in a kind of incorporeal light
of its own kind (sui generis). .
In the Disputed Questions St. Thomas raises the same problem dealt
with in Augustine's De magistro under the heading: Utrum homo
docere alium. possit et dici magister, vel Deus solus (11.1). Both
treatises, which reach the same conclusion from different epistemological
premises, have occasioned a number of comparative studies. For ex-
ample, J. Colleran, The Treatises “De magistro" of Saint Augustine
and Saint Thomas (Diss., Rome 1945).
7 CE. G. Leckie, Concerning the Teacher and On the Immortality of
the Soul by Aurelius Augustine (New York 1938) ix-xxvi
8 Cf. P. Couxcelle, "A propos du titre ‘Augustinus Magister’: Le ‘maitre’
Augustin," Augustinus Magister (Paris 1954) 3.9-11.

Rosenstock-Huessy, E. Der Atem des Geistes (Frankfurt 1951).

THE TEACHER
Chapter 1

1, Augustine. What would you say we are trying to do
whenever we speak?

Adeodatus. As it strikes me right now, we want either to
teach! or to learn.

Aug. I see, and I agree with one of these, but how does this
hold for learning?

Ad. How in the world do you suppose we learn, if not by
asking questions?

Aug. I think that even then we simply want to teach. Now
I am inquiring of you whether you ask a question for any
other reason than to teach the person asked what it is you
want to know.

Ad. What you say is true.

Aug. So you see that our aim in speaking is simply to teach.

Ad. I do not see this clearly. If speaking is no more than
uttering words, I see we do that whenever we sing. And as we
often sing when we are alone where no one else is present, I
do not think we wish to teach anything.

Aug. For my part, I think there is a form of teaching by
way of recalling, and a really important one, which the very
subject under discussion will bring to light. But if you do not
think that we learn by recalling or that we teach when we
bring something to one's mind, I will not oppose you. And I
will now take the position that the two reasons for speaking
are either to teach or to recall something, whether to others

1 Throughout the Dialogue, the term "teach" is used to include any
form of personal communication for the purpose of instruction.
or to ourselves. And this we do even when we are singing.
Would you not say so?

Ad. Not entirely, for I very seldom sing to call something
to my mind. I do it only for pleasure.

Aug. I see what you mean. But you notice, do you not, that
what pleases you in singing is a certain melodious ordering of
sound? Since this can be joined to words, or removed from
them, is singing not one thing and speaking something else?
Melody can be produced by the flute and harp; birds sing too,
and there are times when we hum a musical piece without
words. This can be called singing, but not speech. Do you
have any objection to raise?

Ad. None whatever, really.

2. Aug. Do you think then that language has been introduced solely in order to teach or to recall?

Ad. I would were it not for the difficulty that, in praying,
we are actually speaking, and yet it is not right to believe
that God is taught anything by us, or that we recall something
to His mind.

Aug. You do not realize, I think, that the command to pray
in the secrecy of our chamber?—a term signifying the inner-
most recesses of the soul—was given only for this reason, that
God does not need to be reminded or taught by us in order to
give us what we desire. When a person speaks, he gives an
outward sign of what he wants by means of an articulated
sound. But we must seek and pray to God in the innermost
court of the rational soul which is called the "interior man,"
for it is here that He has wished to make His temple. And
have you not read in the Apostle: "Know you not that you
are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God dwells in
you," and that “Christ dwells in the inner man"?* And have
you not noted the words of the Prophet: "Speak in your

2 Cf. Matt. 6.6.
3 1 Cor. 3.16.
4 Cf. Eph. 3.16,17.
THE TEACHER 9

hearts and repent in your chambers; offer the sacrifice of
justice and hope in the Lord"? Where do you think the
“sacrifice of justice” is to be offered, if not in the “temple”
of the soul and in the “chambers” of the heart? Now we have
to offer sacrifice there where we are to pray. Hence there is
no need, when we pray, for language, that is, for the spoken
word, except, perhaps, to express one’s thoughts, the way
priests do, not so God may hear, but in order that men may
hear and, by this verbal reminder, fix their thoughts upon
God by a unity of heart and mind. Or do you have another
view?

Ad. I am in complete agreement.

Aug. Are you then not concerned by the fact that the great-
est Teacher of all taught us certain words to say when He
was teaching the disciples how to pray? In so doing, He
apparently did nothing else than teach them what they should
say when praying.

Ad. That does not trouble me at all, for He did not teach
the disciples words, but realities by means of words. In this
way they were to call to mind to whom to pray and what to
pray for when, as you said, they pray in the inner sanctum of
the soul.

Aug. You have the right idea. I believe you notice at the
same time that even when a person is trying hard to think,
although we utter not a sound, yet because we are thinking of
the words themselves, we are speaking inwardly in our minds.
So, too, by speaking, we merely call something to mind since,
in turning over the words stored therein, memory brings to
mind the realities themselves which have words for their signs.

Ad. I understand, and I follow you.

5 Ps. 45-6,

6 A reference to the Lord's Prayer (cf. Matt. 6.9-13). In his commentary
On the Lord's Sermon on the Mount. (24.15-37), as well as in Sermon
56, Augustine provides a lengthy and beautiful exposition of this
prayer. Cf. Fathers of the Church 11.122-148; 239-257,
10 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 2

8. Aug. Do we agree then that words are signs?

Ad. We do.

Aug. Well, can there be a sign unless it signifies something?

Ad. No.

Aug. How many words are there in this verse? Si nihil ex
tanta superis placet urbe relinqui! (If it please the gods that
nothing remain of so great a city).

Ad. Eight.

Aug. Are there eight signs, then?

Ad. Yes.

Aug. I believe you grasp the meaning of this verse.

Ad. Well enough, I think.

Aug. Tell me what the words mean, one by one.

Ad. I certainly understand what si signifies, but I find no
other word to explain it.

Aug. Whatever it signifies, do you at least know where it
Occurs?

Ad. It seems to me that si signifies doubt, and where, except
in the mind, can doubt exist?

Aug. I will accept that for the time being. Go on to the
other words.

Ad. Nihil—what else does it signify except what does not
exist?

Aug. Perhaps what you say is true, but I am held back from
agreeing by something you granted before, namely, that
nothing is a sign unless it signifies something. But what does
not exist cannot possibly be something. "Therefore, the second
word in this verse is not a sign because it does not signify
something, and we were wrong in agreeing that all words are
signs, or that every sign signifies something.

Ad. I am really hard pressed by what you say. But it is cer-
tainly sheer folly for us to utter a word when we have nothing
to say. Yet, even as you speak with me now, I do not believe
you are making empty sounds, but by every sound coming
from your lips you are giving me a sign enabling me to under-
stand something. Consequently, you should not utter those
two syllables, when speaking, if you do not signify something
by them. But if you see they are necessary to make a meaning-
ful statement and that they teach or call something to our
mind when they strike the ear, then you will really see what I
want to say, but am unable to explain.

Aug. What, then, are we to do? Instead of saying that
nihil signifies something which is nothing, shall we say that
this word signifies a certain state of mind when, failing to
perceive a reality, the mind nevertheless finds, or thinks it
finds, that such a reality does not exist?

Ad. Maybe that is the very thing I was trying so hard to
explain.

Aug. Be that as it may, let us go on from here so we will not
find ourselves in a most absurd situation.

Ad. What in the world is that?

Aug. That "nothing" is holding us back and causing us
delay.?

Ad. That is certainly ridiculous, and yet I realize that it
can happen, I know not how. Yes, I see plainly that it has
happened.

4. Aug. We shall, God permitting, have a clearer under-
standing of this sort of contradiction in its proper place. For
now, return to that verse and try to explain as well as you can
what the rest of the words signify.

Ad. 'The third word is the preposition ex, for which I think
we can substitute the preposition de.

Aug. I am not asking you to substitute one familiar word
for another equally familiar, of the same meaning, if, in fact,
it does have the same meaning. But let us grant that for now.
To be sure, if the poet had not said ex tanta urbe, but de
tanta, and I were to ask you what de means, you would say
ex, since these are two words, that is, signs, which you suppose
mean the same thing. But I am looking for the one thing
itself, whatever it is, which is signified by these two signs.

Ad. I think that ex signifies a separation of one thing from
something in which it had been present and which is now said
to be “from” the first; whether this no longer remains, as in
that verse where, though the city did not survive, some
Trojans were able to depart “from” it, or where it still re-
mains, as when we say there are traders in Africa “from” the
city of Rome.

Aug. Granted that this is true, without enumerating many
examples that might possibly be cited as exceptions to your
rule, nevertheless you will readily notice this one point, at
least, namely, that you have been explaining words by words,
that is, signs by signs, and what is familiar by what is equally
familiar. But I would like you to point out to me, if you can,
the realities themselves of which these are signs.

Chapter 3

5. Ad. I am astonished that you do not know, or rather,
that you pretend not to know, that your request cannot pos-
sibly be met by any answer of mine. Actually, we are holding
a conversation where we can only reply by means of words.
But you are looking for those realities which, whatever else
they are, are certainly not words, and yet you are also using
words to ask me about them. So you will first have to ask a
question without words so I can then reply in the same
manner.

Aug. You have a right to do this, I admit. But suppose I
should ask you what was signified when these three syllables
paries [wall] are spoken, could you not point with your finger
so I could see clearly the reality itself, of which this three-
THE TEACHER 13

syllable word is a sign. You would be showing it to me, but
without the use of words.

Ad. I grant that this is possible only for names signifying
bodily objects, provided these are present.

Aug. Are we going to call color a body? Do we not rather
speak of it as a quality of bodies?

Ad. That is right.

Aug. Here again, why can it not be indicated with the
finger? Or do you also include with bodies the qualities of
bodies, so that these, as well as bodies, can be shown without
words, whenever they are present?

Ad. When I said “bodies,” I intended that all things
corporeal should be understood, namely, everything which the
senses perceive in bodies.

Aug. But consider whether even here you should allow for
exceptions.

Ad. That is sound advice. For I should not have said all
things corporeal, but all things visible. I indeed acknowledge
that though sound, odor, taste, weight, heat, and other qual-
ities pertaining to the senses other than sight, cannot be
perceived apart from bodies, and are therefore corporeal, yet
they cannot be indicated with a finger.

Aug. Have you never noticed how men converse, as it were,
with deaf people by gestures and how the deaf themselves in
turn use gestures to ask and answer questions, to teach and
to make known either all their wishes or, at least, a good
many of them? When this is done, visual qualities are not the
only ones indicated without the use of words, but also sound,
taste, and other such qualities. And there are actors in the
theaters who often unfold and act out whole stories by dancing,
without the use of words.

Ad. I have no objection, except to note that not only I,
but also your dancing actor himself, could not show you
what the preposition ex signifies without using words.

6. Aug. Perhaps what you say is true. But let us suppose
that he can. You will have no doubt, I think, that no matter
what the bodily movement may be by which he tries to point
out for me the reality signified by this word, it will not be
the reality itself, but a sign. Therefore, he will be indicating,
not indeed one word by another, but still one sign by another
so that the monosyllable ex and the bodily gesture will sig-
nify some one thing which I would like to have pointed out
to me without the use of a sign.

Ad. I ask you, how is such a thing possible?

Aug. The same way that it was possible in the case of the
wall.

Ad, Even that cannot be indicated without a sign, as the
course of our reasoning has shown. For the pointing of the
finger is certainly not the wall, but a sign made to indicate the
wall. Nothing, therefore, can be made known, as I see it, with-
out the use of signs.

Aug. Suppose I should ask you what walking is, and you
were to get up and walk? Would you not be using the reality
itself rather than words, or any signs, to teach me?

Ad. I acknowledge that this is so, and I am ashamed that I
failed to see something so obvious. From this example,
thousands of other things come to mind which can be
made known of themselves, and not through signs, such as
eating, drinking, sitting, standing, shouting, as well as number-
less other cases.

Aug. Well, now, answer me this. Suppose I were completely
ignorant of the meaning of this word and were to ask you
what walking is while you were walking, how would you teach
me?

Ad. I would walk a little faster, so that this new factor,
introduced after your question, would bring it to your atten-
tion; and all the while, nothing else would be going on except
the very thing that had to be made known.

Aug. Do you not realize that walking and hurrying are two
different things? A man who walks is not thereby hurrying,
and one who hurries is not necessarily walking. For we also
speak of hurrying in connection with writing and reading,
and for countless other things. Therefore, if you did what
you were doing a little more quickly, in response to my ques-
tion, I might suppose that there is no difference between
walking and hurrying. For this acceleration of your pace was
the new factor you introduced, and I would be misled on
this account.

Ad. I admit that we cannot indicate something without a
sign if we are asked about it at the time we happen to be
doing it. For if we do not add something to what we are doing,
our questioner will take it that we are unwilling to show him
and that, having ignored him, we continue what we are doing.
But if he asks about things we are able to do, but not at the
time we are doing them, then, by performing the act after his
question, we can show him what he wants to know by the
thing itself, rather than by a sign—unless he chances to ask
me what speaking is while I am speaking. For, in that case,
no matter what I should say to teach him, I will have to speak.
From this point, I shall go on teaching him until I make
plain to him what he wants to know, without deviating from
the thing itself which he wanted to have shown him, and
without looking for signs to indicate it, except for the sign
of language itself.

Chapter 4

7. Aug. A very keen observation, indeed! See, then, whether
we are agreed that those things can be indicated without signs
which we are either not doing when asked about them, but
can do right away, or those which are perhaps signs them-
selves while we are making them. When talking, for example,
we are making signs, from which the term “signify” is derived.

Ad. We agree.

Aug. When, therefore, a question is asked about certain
16 SAINT AUGUSTINE

signs, these can be indicated by means of signs. If, however,
the question concerns things that are not signs, these can be
indicated either by doing them after being questioned, if this
is possible, or by making signs to direct attention to them.

Ad. That is correct.

Aug. Within this three-fold division of signs, let us first
consider, if you will, that class in which signs are indicated by
signs. Words are not the only signs, are they?

Ad. No.

Aug. I think that in speaking we use words to signify words
themselves or other signs, as when we say “gesture,” or "letter,"
for these two words are also signs. Or we use words to signify
something else which is not a sign, as when we say "stone."
Since it signifies something, this word is a sign, but what it sig-
nifies is not in turn a sign. But this kind of sign, namely, that
where words signify things that are not signs, does not belong
to the class of sign now under discussion. For we proposed to
consider the class of signs where signs are indicated by means
of signs. We found that this included two sub-divisions, since
by means of signs we teach or call to mind either the same
signs or different signs. Do you not think so?

Ad. It is perfectly clear.

8. Aug. Tell me, then, to which sense those signs pertain
which are words?

Ad. 'To hearing.

Aug. And gestures?

Ad. To sight.

Aug. What about words we find written? Are they words,
or are they more properly thought of as signs of words? To be
a word, something must be uttered with articulated sound and
have some meaning, and sound can be perceived by no other
sense than hearing. Consequently, when a word is written, the
eyes are given a sign by which something pertaining to hearing
is brought to mind.

Ad. 1 fully agree.

Aug. You will also agree, I think, that when we say “noun,”
we are signifying something.

Ad. That is true.

Aug. Well, what is that?

Ad. That, precisely, which anything is called, as Romulus,
Rome, virtue, river, and numberless other things.

Aug. Do these four nouns not signify something?

Ad. They do, indeed.

Aug. And is there any difference between these nouns and
the things they signify?

Ad. Yes, there is a big difference.

Aug. I would like to hear from you what that difference is.

Ad. First of all, nouns are signs, things are not signs.

Aug. Would you agree if we call things that can be signified
by signs, but are not signs, "signifiables," just as we call things
that can be seen "visible"? This will enable us to deal with
these matters more easily from here on.

Ad. I would certainly agree.

Aug. Well, what about those four signs you mentioned a
short while ago? Can they be signified by any other signs?

Ad. I am surprised that you think I have already forgotten
that we found that written words are signs of other spoken
signs.

Aug. Tell me the difference between them.

Ad. 'The former are visible, the latter, audible. Why not
allow the term "audible," if we have allowed the term "sig-
nifiables"?

Aug. I am quite pleased to allow it. But I ask you again
whether those four signs can be signified by any other audible
sign, as you recalled was the case for visible signs?

Ad. I recall that this was also mentioned a short while ago.
I replied that a noun signifies some thing, and included those
four things under its heading. I also realize that both "noun"
and those four nouns become audible signs when they are
expressed vocally.
18 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Aug. What is the difference then between an audible sign
and the audible reality signified, which, again, is a sign?

Ad. I see there is this difference between, what is called a
noun and those four things included under its meaning. The
former is an audible sign of other audible signs, while the
latter, though real signs, are nevertheless not signs of signs,
but signs of things. Some are visible, such as Romulus and
Rome, others are intelligible, such as virtue.

9. Aug. I am satisfied to accept this. But are you aware that
everything expressed by articulate sound, with meaning, is a
word?

Ad. I am.

Aug. Therefore, a noun is also ἃ word, since, as we see, it is
expressed by articulate sound, with meaning. And when we
say that an eloquent man uses choice words, he is, to be sure,
also using nouns. When the slave in Terence’s play replied
to his old master, "Fair words, I pray you,”! the master had
used many nouns also.

Ad. I agree.

Aug. 'Then you will grant that when we utter the two syl-
lables verbum. (word), we are also signifying "noun," and that
the former is therefore a sign of the latter.

Ad. That I grant.

Aug. I would like you to answer this question too. You said
that "word" is a sign of "noun" and "noun" is a sign of
"river" and "river" is the sign of a reality that we can see;
also, that there is a difference between the reality and "river,"
which is its sign, and between this sign and "noun," which
is the sign of this sign. Tell me, then, what difference you
think there is between the sign of "noun," which was found
to be a "word," and "noun" itself, which is its sign.

Ad. I see there is this difference. Things signified by "noun"
are also signified by “word,” for just as “noun” is a word, so
also is "river" a word. On the other hand, not everything sig-

1 Andria 204.
THE TEACHER 19

nified by “word’ can also be signified by “noun.” For both the
term “if,” at the opening of the verse you quoted, and the
term "from," are words but not nouns, though they have been
occupying our attention for such a long time and have now,
with reason as our guide, led us to the present subject. And
there are many such cases to be found. Consequently, since all
nouns are words but not all words are,nouns, I think the
difference between "word" and "noun" is plain, namely, the
difference between the sign of a sign not signifying other
signs, and a sign of a sign which itself signifies other signs.

Aug. Would you grant that while every horse is an animal,
not every animal is a horse?

Ad. Who would doubt it?

Aug. 'Then the difference between "noun" and "word" is
the same as that between "horse" and "animal." Perhaps what
keeps you from agreeing is the fact that we also use the term
verbum [word] in another sense to signify verbs that are con-
jugated throughout the various tenses, such as: I write, I wrote,
I read, I have read. Obviously, these are not nouns.

Ad. You have indicated precisely the very thing that made
me hesitate.

Aug. Do not let that disturb you. We do, in fact, speak of
signs in a general way, to embrace whatever can signify any-
thing, and here, as we see, words are also included. We like-
wise speak of "military insignia" [signa militaria], which are
properly called signs, but do not include words. Yet, were I to
tell you that just as every horse is an animal but not every
animal is a horse, so too, while every word is a sign, not every
sign is a word, I think you would not hesitate to agree.

Ad. I now see and fully agree that there is the same differ-
ence between "words," taken in a general sense, and "noun,"
as between "animal" and “horse.”

10. Aug. Do you likewise see that when we articulate this
three-syllable word "animal," the noun is one thing, what it
signifies is something else?
20 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Ad. I already granted that before for all signs and things
capable of being signified.

Aug. Do you think that all signs signify something other
than what they are themselves, in the way that the three-syl-
lable word "animal," when spoken, does not signify the word
itself?

Ad. Of course not. For whenever we say "sign," it signifies
not only other signs, whatever they are, but also itself, be-
cause "sign" is a word, and all words are certainly signs.

Aug. But does not something similar occur when we pro-
nounce the two-syllable word verbum [word]? For if it sig-
nifies whatever has meaning and is articulated, then it also
comes under the heading of “word.”

Ad. That is correct.

Aug. But does not the same thing hold true for "noun"? It
also signifies nouns of all genders and is itself a noun of neuter
gender. If I should ask you what part of speech "noun" is,
could you give any other correct answer except a "noun"?

Ad. What you say is true.

Aug. Then there are signs which, among the other thing
they signify, also signify themselves.

Ad. There are such signs.

Aug. Do you think the case is similar when we pronounce
the four-syllable term conjunctio [conjunction]?

Ad. Not at all. For it does not signify nouns, but it is itself
a noun.

Chapter 5

11. Aug. You have been paying close attention. Consider
now whether signs can be found which mutually signify each
other in such a way that the first signifies the second, and the
second, the first. This mutual relation does not obtain be-
tween the foursyllable word conjunctio [conjunction] and
what it signifies, as when we say, “if,” “or,” “for,” “yet,” "un-
THE TEACHER 21

Jess,” "therefore," "since," and the like. For the one word
"conjunction" signifies them all, but no one of them signifies
that four-syllable word itself.

Ad. I understand, and I am eager to know what those signs
are which mutually signify each other.

Aug. Then you fail to see that by saying "noun" and
“word,” we are expressing two words?

Ad. I see that.

Aug. Why, then, do you fail to see that by saying "noun"
and "word," we are expressing two names?

Ad. Tsee that too.

Aug. Then you know that "noun" is signified by “word”
just as “word” is signified by “noun.”

Ad. 1 agree.

Aug. Can you tell me how they differ, apart from the fact
that they are spelled and pronounced differently?

Ad. Possibly I can, for it is the same difference I indicated
a short time ago. When we say "words," we signify everything
expressed by articulate speech and conveying some meaning.
Every noun, then, even "noun" itself, is a word, but not every
word is a noun, though "word" is itself a noun.

12. Aug. What if someone should make this statement, and
prove it, namely, that just as every noun is a word, so too,
every word is a noun, could you find any difference between
them, apart from the different sounds of the letters?

Ad. No, I think there is no difference between them.

Aug. What if all sounds expressed by articulated speech
and conveying some meaning are both words and nouns, but
are designated words for one reason, and nouns for another—
would there be no difference between them?

Ad. I do not see how there could be.

Aug. You will at least understand this, that everything
colored is visible and everything visible is colored, though
these two words have separate and different meanings.

Ad. I understand.
22 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Aug. What, then, if the same obtains where every word is
a noun and every noun is a word, though these same two
nouns or words, namely, “noun” and “word,” have a different
meaning?

Ad. I see now that this can occur, but I am waiting for you
to show me how.

Aug. You are, I think, aware that everything expressed by
articulate voice and conveying some meaning must both strike
the ear to be heard and be committed to the memory to be
known.

Ad. I am aware of that.

Aug. So two things happen whenever we give expression to
something by means of articulate sound.

Ad. That is correct.

Aug. What if words derive their name from one of the two
things, and nouns from the other? Suppose, that is, that words
[verba] come from "striking" [verberando], and nouns
[nomina] from "knowing" [noscendo], so that the former has
earned its name because of the ear, the latter, because of the
mind.t

13. Aug. I will grant this when you show me that we are
correct in saying that all words are nouns.

Ad. That is easy.

Aug. You learned, I suppose, and still remember, that a
pronoun is so called because it can stand for a noun, though
it indicates the reality less perfectly than a noun. I think this
was the definition you recited to your grammar teacher,
namely, that a pronoun is a part of speech which, when sub-
stituted for the noun itself, signifies the same thing, though
less perfectly.

Ad. I remember the definition and think it is a good one.

Aug. So you see that according to this definition pronouns
serve only for nouns and can be substituted for them only.

1 Although the derivation of nomen from noscere is disputed, there
appears to be no solid philological basis whatever between verbum
ahd verberare.
THE TEACHER 28
When we say, for example, “this man,” “the king himself,”
“the same woman,” “this gold,” “that silver,” the terms “this,”
“himself,” “same,” “this,” and “that,” are pronouns; “man,”
“king,” "woman," “gold,” “silver,” are. nouns, which signify
their objects more perfectly than do pronouns.

Ad. I understand this and agree.

Aug. Now, mention some conjunctions—any at all.

Ad. Et [and], que [and], at [but], atque [and].

Aug. Do you think that all these that you have mentioned
are nouns?

Ad. By no means.

Aug. Do you think that I was at least speaking correctly
when I said: "All these that you have mentioned"?

Ad. Absolutely. Now I realize how cleverly you made me see
that I was giving expression to nouns, since, otherwise, it
would have been incorrect to say “all these.” But I still have
the fear that you seemed to have spoken correctly only
because there is no denying that these four conjunctions are
also words. Consequently, they could be referred to correctly
as “all these," because it is correct to say "all these words."
But if you ask me what part of speech is "words," I can only
reply that it is a noun. Perhaps, then, it was the inclusion of
the pronoun with this noun that made your expression correct.

14. Aug. You have made an intelligent mistake. But that
you may be mistaken no longer, pay closer attention to what
I have to say, if only I can express it the way I want to. Now
dealing with words by means of words is just as bewildering
as intertwining and scratching one's fingers, where it is almost
impossible to tell, except for the person doing it, which fingers
are itching and which are relieving the itch.

Ad. See, I am all attention! That analogy has stirred my
curiosity.

Aug. Words, of course, are made up of sounds and letters.

Ad. True.

Aug. Let us first of all make use of that authority so dear
24 SAINT AUGUSTINE

to us. When the Apostle Paul says: "There was not in Christ
‘is’ and ‘is not,’ but ‘is’ was in Him,"? I do not think we are
to imagine that the three letters used in saying est [is] were
in Christ, but rather what those three letters signify.

Ad. What you say is true.

Aug. So you see that when the Apostle said: “Is [est] was
in Him,” he said simply that “what was in Him is called ‘is’
[est].” It was as if he had said, “Power was in Him,” which
could only mean that what we call “power” was in Him. We
are not to suppose that the two syllables enunciated in saying
“power” are what was in Christ, but rather what these two
syllables signify.

Ad. I understand and follow you.

Aug. Do you not also understand that it makes no differ-
ence whether someone says, "it is called virtue," or "it is
named virtue"?

Ad. That is obvious.

Aug. Then it is just as obvious that it makes no difference
whether someone says, “what was in Him is called ‘is,’” or “is
named "15."

Ad. I see that here, too, there is no difference.

Aug. Do you also see what I am trying to point out to you?

Ad. I do not, really.

Aug. Then do you likewise fail to see that a noun is that
by which a thing is named?

Ad. Clearly, nothing could be more certain.

Aug. So you see that "is" is a noun, since what was in Him
is named “is.”

Ad. I cannot deny it.

Aug. But if I should ask you what part of speech is "is" I
think you would say it is not a noun, but a verb, though our
reasoning has shown us that it is also a noun.

Ad. It is just as you say.

22 Cor. 1.19. Translations which follow the Greck rather than thc
Vulgate render the passage: "for the Son of God . . . was not now ‘Yes’
and now ‘No,’ but only ‘Yes’ was in him."
THE TEACHER 25

Aug. Do you still doubt that the other parts of speech are
also nouns in the same way as we have just shown?

Ad. I do not, because I now admit that they signify some-
thing. But were you to ask, one by one, what the things they
signify are called, that is, what their names are, I could only
answer that they are the very parts of speech which are not
called “nouns,” although our reasoning has, as I now perceive,
shown them to be nouns.

15, Aug. Are you unconcerned that someone may be found
to upset your reasoning by asserting that the Apostle’s au-
thority must be allowed where realities are concerned, but not
for words, with the result that the basis for this position is not
so strong as we think? For, while it is possible that Paul was
perfectly correct in his life and teaching, he did, nevertheless,
express himself somewhat incorrectly when He said, “ ‘is’ was
in Him,” all the more so, since he admits himself that he is
“unskilled in speech"? How do you suppose we should refute
such a person?

Ad. I could not gainsay such a man. I do entreat you to find
someone among those experts in language whose high com-
petence is recognized, whose authority will better enable you
to accomplish your purpose.

Aug. So you think that without authorities, reason itself
is incapable of proving that all the parts of speech signify
something and thereby give it a designation; if it has a desig-
nation, it has a name; if it has a name, it certainly gets its
name from a noun. This is readily discernible in the various
languages. Anyone can see, for example, that if you ask what
the Greek word is for “who,” the answer is tis; for "wish,"
thelo; for “well,” kalós; for "something written," to gegram-
menon; for "and," kai; for “from,” apo; for “alas,” oi. Now the
one who asks such questions concerning all these parts of
speech which we enumerated is speaking correctly, which
would not be possible unless they were nouns. Accordingly,

3 Cf. 2 Cor. 11.16.
26 SAINT AUGUSTINE

since we are able to establish that the Apostle Paul spoke cor-
rectly according to this line of reasoning, without recourse to
all the masters of eloquence, what need is there to look for
some person to support our position?

16. But lest there be someone who will not yet yield,
because he is too dull or arrogant, but declares that he will
not yield at all except to authorities whose function to legis-
late regarding words is recognized by common consent—
then, is there anything more excellent than Cicero to be found
in the Latin language? Now, in his finest orations, known as
the Verrines, he called the preposition coram (before) a noun,
though it may be an adverb in this passage.* Since I do not
quite understand the passage, it is possible that a different ex-
planation may be advanced at another time, either by myself
or by someone else. But there is one point, I think, which can-
not possibly be gainsaid. The most celebrated masters of
argumentation, for example, teach that a complete sentence
is made up of a noun and a verb, and may be either affirmative
or negative. The same Tullius refers somewhere to this form
of discourse as ἃ "proposition." They also teach, and rightly
so, that when the verb is in the third person, the case of the
noun must be the nominative. If you examine with me such
expressions as "the man sits" or "the horse runs," you will, I
think, recognize that these are two propositions.

Ad. I do.

Aug. Do you see there is a separate noun in each of the
propositions: "man," in the first, "horse," in the other; and
also a separate verb: "sits," in the first, "runs," in the other?

Ad. I see that.

Aug. So if I were only to say "sits" or "runs," you would
rightly ask me “who?” or “what?”, and I would reply "a man,”

4In Verrem 22.04 (". .. totum hoc momen, coram ubi facit dela-
tui ^). According to H. Hagendahl, this is "a curious misinterpr
tation" of Cicero's Latinity; see his Augustine and the Latin Classics
(2 vols. Studia Graeca et Latina Gothoburgensia 20:12; Gütcborg
1967) 2.483; cf. 1.50 (test. 105) .

5 C£. Tusculanae disputationes 1.7.14.

THE TEACHER 27

or “a horse,” or “an animal,” or something else, so that by
joining the noun again to the verb, a complete proposition
would result, namely, a sentence, whether affirmative or
negative.

Ad. I understand.

Aug. Pay attention to what else I have to say. Suppose we
are viewing something at a distance and are not sure whether
it is an animal or a stone, or something else. If I should say
to you, “Because it is a man, it is an animal,” would I not
be speaking rashly?

Ad. Very much so. But if you should say, “If it is a man, it
is an animal,” you would certainly not be speaking rashly.

Aug. You are correct. Hence the term "if" in your sentence
is acceptable to both of us, while the term “because” in my
sentence is unacceptable to both of us.

Ad. 1 agree.

Aug. See now whether these two sentences are complete
propositions: “ ‘If’ is acceptable" [Placet si]; “ ‘Because’ is not
acceptable” [Displicet quia].

Ad. They are altogether complete.

Aug. Come now, tell me which words are the verbs, and
which the nouns.

Ad. I see that the verbs are “is acceptable" [placet] and “is
not acceptable" [displicet], whereas the nouns can only be "if"
and “because.”

Aug. Then it has been sufficiently established that these two
conjunctions are also nouns.

Ad. Quite sufficiently.

Aug. Can you prove by yourself that the same things hold
for the other parts of speech in accordance with this same
rule?

Ad. I can.

Chapter 6

17, Aug. Let us go on from here. Tell me now whether you
28 SAINT AUGUSTINE

think that all names are terms [vocabula], and all terms are
nouns, just as we found that all words are nouns and all nouns
are words.

Ad. Except for the different sounds of the syllables, I really
see no difference between them.

Aug. 1 will not object to that for now, although there are
those who do make a distinction between them in meaning.
But there is no need to examine their opinion just now. It
must surely occur to you that we have now come to those signs
which signify one another mutually, where the only difference
is one of sound, and which signify themselves, together with
the other parts of speech.

Ad. I do not understand,

Aug. Then you fail to understand that "noun" is signified
by "term" and "term" by "noun" in such a way that, except
for the sound of the letters, there is no difference between
them so far as the general meaning of "noun" is concerned.
For we also speak of "noun" in a particular sense, where it is
found among the eight parts of speech and does not include
the other seven.

Ad. I understand.

Aug. But that is the very thing I said—terms and nouns
signify each other mutually.

18. Ad. That I understand, but I am asking what you meant
by saying that these signs signify themselves, together with the
other parts of speech.

Aug. Did not our reasoning show us before that all the
parts of speech can be called both nouns and terms, that is to
say, they can be signified both by "noun" and "term"?

Ad. That is right.

Aug. What of “noun” itself, namely, the sound expressed
by the two syllables nomen [name]? If I ask what you would
call it, would you not answer correctly that it is a "noun"?

Ad. That would be correct.

Aug. But does not the four-syllable sign, which is expressed
THE TEACHER 29

by our saying conjunctio [conjunction], signify itself in this
way? We cannot include this noun among the things it sig-
nifies.

Ad. Now I have it right.

Aug. That is precisely what was said, namely, that "noun"
signifies itself together with the other things it signifies, and
you can see for yourself that the same things hold for "term."

Ad. Now it is easy. But it occurs to me now that "noun" can
be understood both in a general and in a particular sense,
whereas "term" is not included among the eight parts of
speech. Accordingly, I think they also differ in this respect,
over and above the difference in sound.

Aug. What of nomen and onoma? Do you think there is any
difference between them except for the sounds which dis-
tinguish the Latin and Greek languages?

Ad. I really see no other difference here.

Aug. We have reached this conclusion, therefore, in our
discussion: there are signs which signify themselves; signs that
signify each other mutually; signs that have the same exten-
sion; signs that differ only in sound. This fourth kind of sign
we have just discovered; the first three were understood to
apply both to “nouns” and “words.”

Ad. That much has been settled.

Chapter 7

19. Aug. I would like you to review the results of our con-
versation.

Ad. I shall do the best I can. I recall, first of all, that we
inquired for a time about the purpose of language and dis-
covered that we speak either to teach or to recall. Even when
we ask questions, we do nothing more than teach the person
interrogated what we wish to learn from him. In the case of
singing, what we are apparently doing for pleasure is not
30 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the proper function of language. In praying to God, who can-
not conceivably be taught or reminded of anything, our words
serve either to remind ourselves or to enable us to remind
and teach others. Then, after it had been made sufficiently
clear that words are merely signs, and that what fails to sig-
nify something is not a sign, you recited a verse where I should
try to point out the meaning of the words, one by one. The
verse was this: “If it please the gods that nothing remain of so
great a city.” While the second word [nihil] is familiar and
perfectly obvious, we failed nevertheless to discover its mean-
ing. And when I was of the opinion that we do not insert it
in speaking without some reason, but use it to teach some-
thing to one hearing it, you did indeed reply that it possibly
indicates a state of mind, whenever the mind has found, or
thinks it has found, that something it was looking for does
not exist. But you put off clarifying the matter for another
time, and avoided probing this unexplored problem by means
of a humorous remark. And do not suppose that 1 have for-
gotten what you promised.

Then, when I had all I could do to explain the third word
of the verse, you kept after me not to explain one word by
another of the same meaning, but to point out the reality
itself signified by the words. And when I stated that this was
not possible in conversation, we went on to consider things
that can be indicated by pointing the finger as a reply to those
who ask about them. These included, I thought, all corporeal
things, but we discovered that only things visible were in-
cluded. Then, somehow or other, we came to consider the case
of deaf people and actors, who, without speaking, use gestures
to signify not only things that can be seen, but also many
other things besides, in fact, almost everything that we in-
dicated by speech; yet, we found that gestures themselves are
signs. After that, we began again to inquire how we might be
able, without the use of signs, to indicate the very things
signified by signs, seeing that we can indicate the wall, colors,
THE TEACHER 31

and things visible by pointing the finger, which is also shown
to be a sign. Here, alter 1 had made the mistake of saying
that no such thing was possible, we finally agreed that those
things can be indicated without signs which we are not doing
at the time we are asked about them, but which we are able
to do once we are questioned. Speaking, however, is not in-
cluded in this class, since it was perfectly clear that if we are
asked what speaking is, while we are speaking, it is easy to
indicate the action by the very thing itself.

20. This enabled us to see that there are signs that mani-
fest signs, and signs that manifest things that are not signs;
and again, that those things can be manifested without signs,
which we are able to do after being questioned about them.
We undertook a more thorough examination and discussion
concerning the first of these three. It became clear from our
discussion that some signs cannot in turn be signified by
those signs which they signify, as is the case when we use the
foursyllable word conjunctio [conjunction]; also, that there
are other signs which can. When we say "sign," for example,
we also signify "word," and when we say "word," we also
signify "sign," because "sign" and "word" are two signs as well
as two words. Within that class of signs, however, which sig-
nify one another mutually, we showed that some do not have
the same extension, others have the same extension, while
others are identical. For example, the two-syllable word ex-
pressed when we say signum [sign], signifies all the signs by
which a thing can be signified at all. But when we say "word,"
this is not a sign of all signs, but only of those expressed by
the articulated voice. It is clear, then, that although verbum
[word] is signified by signum [sign] and vice versa, that is,
the first two syllables are signified by the latter two, and the
latter by the former, nevertheless, signum has a wider ex-
tension than verbum. That is to say, the first two syllables
have a wider extension than the latter two.

But "word" and "noun" have the same extension when
32 SAINT AUGUSTINE

used in a general sense. Our line of reasoning has actually
shown that all the parts of speech can also be nouns, because
pronouns can be used in connection with them. Also, that
they name something, and that all of them can form a com-
plete sentence by adding a verb to them. Yet, while "noun"
and "word" have the same extension, since every word is
also a noun, they do not have the same meaning. We did,
in fact, show that it was quite probable that they are desig-
nated "words" for one reason, and "nouns" for another. We
found that the first of these indicated a "striking" on the ear,
and the second a recalling on the part of the mind. This can
be seen, for example, from the fact that in speaking, it is
perfectly correct to say: "What is the name for this thing?"
whenever we want to commit it to our memory; it is not usual
ior us to say: "What is the word for this thing?"

On the other hand, we found that nomen and onoma are
signs that have not only the same extension, but are also com-
pletely the same in meaning, differing only in the sound of
their letters. This one point, it is true, did escape me, namely,
that in the class of signs which signify mutually, we found
none that did not also signify itself among the other things
it signified.

I have recalled these points to the best of my ability. I
leave it to you to say whether I have arranged them in a good
and logical order, for I do not think you said anything in
our conversation unless you knew it was certain.

Chapter 8

21. Aug. You have done rather well to recall from memory
everything that I asked. Furthermore, I must acknowledge to
you that these distinctions seem much clearer to me now than
they did when we were both bringing them to light from some
sort of hidden abode by means of our inquiry and discussion.
THE TEACHER 33

But it is hard to say at this point what the objective is that
I am trying to reach with you by such roundabout ways.
Maybe you think we are being playful and are turning our
minds from serious matters by some kind of childish and
trifling questions, or that we are only looking for a slight or
unimportant result. Or, if you feel that this discussion will
result in something important, you want to know right now
what it is, or a least to hear what it is. Now I want you to
know that I have not injected any worthless comedy! into our
conversation, though we may perhaps be acting playfully. Yet
even this is not to be regarded as child’s play, nor are we to
suppose that we have only slight or unimportant benefits in
mind. And yet, if I assert that there is a happy life, and one
that is everlasting, and that I desire that we should be led to
it by God, Who is Truth itself,2 as our Guide, by stages
adapted to our faltering steps, I fear I may seem ridiculous
for having first embarked upon so long a course with a con-
sideration of signs rather than of the realities they signify.
You will pardon me then if I engage in some preliminary
play with you, not for the sake of playing, but to exercise and
sharpen our mental powers. This will enable us not only to
endure, but also to love the warmth and light of that region
wherein is found the happy life.*

Ad. Do go on as you have begun, for I could never consider
as trivial anything which you think is worth saying or doing.

22. Aug. Come now, and let us consider the class of signs
which signify, not other signs, but the things we call sig-
nifiable. And, first of all, tell me whether man is man.

Ad. I cannot tell now whether you are joking.

1 vilia ludicra. A reference to the previous passage (2.3) where, indulging
in a play on words, Augustine remarks that the discussion of "nothing"
has resulted in their being detained by “nothing.”

2 An excellent presentation of this central theme in Augustine’s philos-
ophy is available in C. Boyer, L'Idée de vérité dans la philosophie de
saint Augustin (2 ed. Paris 1940).

3 The subject of Augustine's early Dialogue, The Happy Life. The
thought and language of this passage reflect the influence of Plato's
dialectic as a necessary preparation for the soul's vision of the truth.
34 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Aug. Why is that?

Ad, Because you think I have to be asked whether man is
anything but man.

Aug. So I suppose you would think I was jesting with you
if I were also to ask whether the first syllable of this noun man
[homo] is other than ho, and the second other than mo.

Ad. I certainly would.

Aug. But would you deny that these two syllables, taken
together, make homo?

Ad. Who could deny it?

Aug. I ask you, then, whether you are these two connected
syllables?

Ad. Not at all. But 1 do see what you are driving at.

Aug. Well then, tell me, so you will not think I am being
offensive.

Ad. You think the conclusion is that I am not a man.

Aug. Why should you not think the same, since you grant
as true all the previous points from which this conclusion was
drawn?

Ad. I will not tell you what I think until I first hear from
you whether, in questioning me as to whether man is man, you
are asking about those two syllables, or about the reality itself
which they signify.

Aug. You tell me, instead, in what sense you have taken my
question. For if it is ambiguous, you should have guarded
against this before and should not have answered until you
were certain in what sense I proposed the question.

Ad. Why should I be hampered by this ambiguity, when I
have replied to both senses of the question? 'The term homo
[man] is certainly homo, since those two syllables are nothing
more than those two syllables, and what they signify is none
other than the existing reality.

Aug. An ingenious reply, to be sure. But why have you
taken only this term “man” in both senses, and not the others
that we also mentioned?
THE TEACHER 35

Ad. How can you prove that 1 did not also take the others
in the same way?

Aug. To mention only one, if you had understood my first
question entirely from the viewpoint of the sound of the
syllables, you would have given me no answer, for you could
have thought that I had not even asked a question. But now,
when I expressed three words, repeating the one in the
middle, and asked utrum homo homo sit [whether man is
man], you understood the first and last words, not as mere
signs, but as realities signified by the signs. This was obvious
from the mere fact that you were at once so certain and sure
of yourself as to feel that my question should be answered.

Ad. What you say is true.

Aug. Why, then, did you see fit to take only the middle
word [homo] both with respect to the sound and to the
reality it signifies?

Ad. Look here, now I am going to take the whole sentence
from the viewpoint of what is signified. For I agree with you
that we simply cannot engage in conversation unless the mind
is directed by the sound of the words to the realities signified
by these signs. Now, then, show me how I was deceived by a
line of reasoning that resulted in the conclusion that I am
nota man.

Aug. No, but I shall repeat the same questions so that you
can find out for yourself where you made your mistake.

Ad. You are right.

23. Aug. Y will not repeat my first question because you
have already answered it. See, now, whether the syllable ho
is anything other than ho, and the syllable mo anything other
than mo.

Ad. Really, I can see no difference here.

Aug. See, likewise, whether man [homo] results from the
combination of these two syllables.

Ad. I could never grant such a thing. We did agree, and
rightly so, that whenever a sign is expressed, our attention
36 SAINT AUGUSTINE

should be directed to the reality it signifies, and, once we have
considered it, we should either affirm or deny what it ex-
pressed. Since, however, those two syllables have no meaning
when they are pronounced separately, we agreed that they were
only sounds.

Aug. Then you agree, and are firmly convinced, that answers
to questions should be made only with reference to the things
signified by the words.

Ad. I see no reason to disagree, provided that the sounds are
words.

Aug. I would like to see how you would refute the man who
concluded that a lion came forth from the mouth of his op-
ponent, as is often told in jest. When asked whether the
things we say do come forth from our mouth, the other could
not deny it. He had no trouble getting the man to say "lion"
while he was speaking. When that happened, he began to
make fun of him and to press the point that, good man that
he was, he had discharged from his mouth so savage a beast;
for he had acknowledged that whatever we say comes forth
from our mouth, and he could not deny that he had said
"lion."

Ad. Really, it would not be difficult at all to refute such a
buffoon, because I would not grant that whatever we say goes
out of our mouth. We signify the things we speak of, and
what comes forth from the speaker's mouth is not the thing
signified, but the sign by which it is signified. We make an
exception for signs that signify themselves, but we dealt with
this class a short time ago.

24. Aug. This would certainly make you a match for him.
Just the same, what answer would you give me if asked
whether “man” is a noun?

Ad. What else, but a noun?

Aug. Well, then, am I seeing a noun when I look at you?

Ad. No.

Aug. Do you want me to say what follows from this?
THE TEACHER 37

Ad. Please do not. I can see for myself the inference that I
am not a man, since in reply to your question whether man
is a noun, I said that it was. We had, in fact, already agreed
that when we give or deny assent to what is said, we do so
from the side of the reality which is signified.

Aug. But the very fact that you hit upon this reply is, in my
opinion, not without significance. For reason’s own law, which
is implanted in our minds, prevailed over your caution. If I
were to ask, for example, what man is, you might answer an
“animal.” But if I should ask what part of speech is “man,”
the only correct answer you could give would be a “noun.”
Consequently, though man is found to be both a noun and an
animal, the former designation has to do with signs, the latter,
with the thing signified. So when anyone asks whether “man”
is a “noun,” I can only reply that it is, since he indicates
clearly enough that he wants to know what man is precisely
as a sign. But if he asks whether man is an animal, I will reply
in the affirmative even more promptly. If he does not mention
either "noun" or "animal," and merely asks what man [homo]
is, then, following an approved rule of language, my mind
would quickly turn its attention to the reality signified by the
two syllables, and answer an "animal"; or I might even state
the full definition of man, namely, that he is a mortal rational
animal. Do you not think so?

Ad. I do, absolutely. But when we grant that "man" is a
noun, how can we escape the highly offensive conclusion that
we are not men?

Aug. How do you suppose, if not by showing that this con-
clusion was not drawn according to the sense of the term
agreed upon with the one who asked the question. But if he
acknowledges that he drew the conclusion from the other
sense of the term, the inference should not frighten us at
all. For why should I fear to admit that I am not "man"
[hominem], namely, that I am not those three syllables?

Ad. Nothing could be truer. Why, then, does the mind take
38 SAINT AUGUSTINE

offense at the inference that you are not “man,” since, accord-
ing to what we have agreed upon, nothing truer could be said?

Aug. Because I cannot help thinking that as soon as the
words are expressed, the conclusion has reference to the
reality itself signified by these two syllables; and this, by
reason of that rule so compelling by nature, namely, that
whenever the sounds are heard, our attention is directed
towards the things signified.

Ad. I agree.

Chapter 9

25. Aug. Now, then, I would have you understand that the
realities signified are to be valued more highly than their
signs. For whatever exists for the sake of something else must
be of less value than that for which it exists. Would you
agree?

Ad. I do not think one should assent to this too hastily.
When we say “filth” [coenum], for example, I think the word
far excels the reality it signifies. For that which makes the
term offensive to us, whenever we hear it, has nothing to do
with the sound of the word. Actually, by changing a single
letter, the noun coenum [filth] becomes coelum [heaven]; and
we see how far apart the realities are which these nouns sig-
nify. That is why I could never impute to the sign the quality
we loathe in the reality which it signifies. I am right, then, in
preferring the former to the latter, for we would rather hear
the word than experience the reality by any of our senses.

Aug. You are very much on the alert. It is false, then, that
all realities are to be valued more highly than their signs?

Ad. It looks that way.

Aug. Tell me, now, what you think those men had in mind
when they gave a name to something so foul and revolting as
this; also, whether you approve or disapprove what they did.
THE TEACHER 39

Ad. For my part, I would not presume to approve or dis-
approve, nor do I have any idea of what they had in mind.

Aug. Can you at least see what you yourself have in mind
when you mention the word?

Ad. I certainly can. My purpose is to use a sign in order
to teach or remind the one I am speaking with about this
particular reality, because 1 think that this is something he
should know.

Aug. What of the knowledge itself exchanged between you
by such teaching and calling to mind, which you aptly ex-
press by means of this name? Is it not to be more highly
valued than the word itself?

Ad. I grant that the knowledge itself which results from
such a sign should be regarded more highly than the sign, but
I do think that this is therefore also true of the reality.

26. Aug. Although it may be false, in our opinion, that all
realities should be valued above their signs, it still remains
true that everything that exists for the sake of something else
is of less value than that for which it exists. To be sure, the
knowledge of filth, for the sake of which the word “filth” has
been coined, should be more highly esteemed than the word
itself which, in turn, must be preferred, as we have seen, to
filth itself. The sole reason why this knowledge has been pre-
ferred to the sign now under discussion is that the latter
exists for the sake of the former, not the former for the sake
of the latter. So it was that a certain glutton, a “worshiper
of the belly,"! to use the words of the Apostle, declared that he
lived to eat. Exasperated by what he heard, a certain temperate
man replied: "Would it not be much better to eat in order to
live?"? It was, nevertheless, because of this very same rule that
both had so spoken. The glutton was in disfavor simply be-
cause he so underestimated the value of his life as to esteem

1 Cf. Rom. 16.18.

2 An ancient maxim of uncertain origin, sometimes attributed to
Socrates. Cf. A. Gellius, Noctes Atticae 9.27; Quintilian, Institutio
oratoria 9.3.85.
40 SAINT AUGUSTINE

it of less worth than the pleasures of the palate, declaring that
he had lived for the sake of feasting. The temperate man de-
serves to be praised for the single reason that, recognizing
which of the two should be done for the sake of the other,
subordinate, that is, to the other, he reminded us that we
should eat to live rather than live to eat. Again, if some talk-
ative person, with an infatuation for words, should say, “I
teach in order to talk,” you or any other person capable of
discerning the true value of things might well reply: “Dear
man, why do you not rather talk in order to teach?”

If all this be true, and you know it is, you must indeed
realize how much less value is to be given to words than to
the things on account of which we use words. Even our use
of words must itself be given priority over words. For words
exist to be used, and we make use of them to teach. Teaching,
therefore, excels talking just as much as talking excels words.
So teaching far excels words. But I am eager to hear any ob-
jections that you think might be raised.

27, Ad. I certainly agree that teaching is superior to words.
But I do not know whether some objection might not be made
to that rule which states that everything which exists for the
sake of something else is inferior to that for which it exists.

Aug. We shall treat this problem more appropriately and
more thoroughly at another time. For the present, the point
that you grant is sufficient for what I am trying to prove. You
grant, for example, that the knowledge of realities is of
greater value than their signs. Consequently, the knowledge
of these realities which are signified is to be preferred to the
knowledge of their signs. Do you not think so?

Ad. Have I ever granted that the knowledge of realities is
superior to a knowledge of their signs, but not superior to
the signs themselves? So I am afraid to agree with you on this
point. Suppose, for example, that just as the name “filth” is
better than what it signifies, so, too, the knowledge of this
name is to be preferred to the knowledge of that reality,
THE TEACHER 41

though the name itself is inferior to this knowledge—then
what? We are really dealing with four things here: the name,
the reality, knowledge of the name, and knowledge of the
reality. Hence, just as the first excels the second, why may the
third not excel the fourth? Even if it does not excel, must we
also consider it inferior?

28. Aug. I see that you have done remarkably well to re-
member what you have granted, as well as to explain your
own views. But you do understand, I suppose, that this three-
syllable noun which we express by saying vitium [vice] is
better than what it signifies, though the knowledge of the
noun itself is of far less value than the knowledge of vices.
Accordingly, even though you propose those four things and
give them your attention—the name, the reality, knowledge
of the name, knowledge of the reality—we rightly prefer the
first to the second. This name is found, for example, in the
poem where Persius says: “This man is stupified by vice,"*
and not only does it not vitiate the verse, but it even lends
embellishment to it. But when the reality signified by the
name is found in anyone, it necessarily leaves him vitiated.
But then the third thing does not excel the fourth, but the
fourth, the third. For the knowledge of this name is of little
importance compared to the knowledge of vices.

Ad. Do you think such knowledge is preferable, even when
it makes men all the more wretched? For of all the punish-
ments ever devised by cruel tyrants or inflicted by their greed,
this same Persius assigns the first place to that which tortures
men who are compelled to acknowledge vices which they can-
not avoid.

Aug. In the same way, you could also deny that even the
knowledge of virtues is preferable to the knowledge of the
name “virtue,” since to see virtue and not to have it is a
torment. And it was the wish of this same satirist that tyrants
might be punished this way.*

8 Sat. 8.82.
4 CE. ibid. 35-38.
42 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Ad. God save us from such folly! I see now that when the
mind is imbued with knowledge by the noblest of all the
branches of learning,® it is not the knowledge itself that is to
be blamed. I see too that they should be deemed the most
wretched of all, as I think Persius himself thought, who
suffer from a disorder of this kind which cannot even be
relieved by so potent a remedy.

Aug. You are right. But what does it matter to us, whatever
Persius thought? In matters of this kind we are not subject
to the authority of the poets. Then too, the question of which
kind of knowledge is preferable to another cannot be easily
explained here. I am satisfied with what we have shown so
far, namely, that the knowledge of realities which are signified,
even if not superior to the knowledge of signs, is nevertheless
superior to the signs themselves. So let us examine more and
more thoroughly what kind of realities those are which, as we
have said, can be indicated without signs, such as speaking,
walking, sitting, lying down, and so on.

Ad. I now recall the problem you mention.

Chapter 10

29, Aug. Do you think that all those actions which we can
perform as soon as we are asked about them, can be indicated
without signs, or would you make some exceptions?

Ad. As I consider over and over again this class of signs as
a whole, I still find that nothing can be taught without signs,
with the possible exception of speaking, and perhaps teaching,
if someone should ask just what teaching itself is. For I see
that whatever I do to make him learn, in response to his
inquiry, he will not be learning from the action itself which
he wants to have shown him. Now if someone should ask
me what walking is when, as we said, I am not doing any-

5 A reference to the excellence and primacy assigned to moral science
by Socrates, Plato, and the Stoics.
THE TEACHER 43

thing, or am doing something else, and I should try, without
signs, to teach him what he wants to know by starting at
once to walk, how shall I keep him from thinking that the
distance I walked means the same as walking? He would be
mistaken to think so, because he will suppose that someone
who walks a longer or shorter distance than I did is not
walking. And what I have said about this one word “walking”
carries over to all those things which I had agreed could be
indicated without signs, apart from the two exceptions we
have made.

30. Aug. This I accept, of course. But do you not think that
speaking is one thing and teaching another?

Ad. It certainly seems so. For if they were the same, no one
could teach unless he were speaking. But since we also teach
many things by signs other than words, who could doubt that
there is a difference?

Aug. What about teaching and signifying? Are they the
same, or is there some difference?

Ad. I think they are the same.

Aug. But suppose someone else were to say that we teach in
order to use signs? Could he not be easily refuted by applying
the rule we mentioned before?

Ad. 'That is correct.

Aug. So if we use signs to teach, and do not teach in order
to use signs, teaching and signifying are not the same thing.

Ad. 'That is true, and I was wrong when I answered that
they were the same.

Aug. Now answer me this: when one is teaching what teach-
ing is, does he do this by using signs, or in some other way?

Ad. I fail to see how he could do it otherwise.

Aug. Then what you said a while ago is untrue, namely,
that when one is asked what teaching is, the thing itself can
be shown without the use of signs. For we realize now that not
even this can be done without signs, seeing that you have

1 Namely, speaking and teaching.
44 SAINT AUGUSTINE '

granted that using signs and teaching are not the same. If they
are different, as it appears they are, and the latter can only
be indicated by the former, then teaching is certainly not
made known by itself, as you had thought. So nothing has
yet been found that can be made known of itself, except for
speaking, which, in addition to other things, also signifies
itself. But, since even this is also a sign, there is as yet ab-
solutely no evidence to show that anything can be taught
without the use of signs.

Ad. I see no reason to disagree.

31. Aug. Then it has been established that nothing can
be taught without signs, and that we should value knowledge
itself more highly than the signs which lead us to it, though
it may be that some of the things signified are not superior to
their signs.

Ad. It seems so.

Aug. Please bear in mind, will you, what a small result has
come from such a roundabout discussion. Now, from the
moment we began this fencing with words, which has been
going on for so long, we have done our best to find out three
things: whether anything can be taught without signs; whether
some signs should be preferred to what they signify; and
whether the knowledge of realities themselves is better than
their signs. But there is a fourth point that I would like to
find out from you in a few words, namely, do you think that
things we have already discovered are such that you can no
longer doubt about them?

Ad. I would certainly like to think that we have arrived at
some certainties by so devious and winding a course. But
that question of yours unsettles me for some strange reason,
and keeps me from giving assent. For I think you would not
ask me this unless you had some objection to make. Besides,
the very complexity of these questions does not permit me
to get a view of the whole problem and give a safe answer. I
fear that amidst such complexity some point will pass un-
THE TEACHER 45

noticed which my mind may not be sharp enough to bring to
light.

Aug. I am glad to put up with your hesitation, for it re-
veals a cautious habit of mind, and this is the surest safeguard
to preserve tranquility. It is very difficult indeed not to be
perturbed when the things we held with a ready and eager
assent are demolished by opposing arguments, and are
wrenched, so to speak, from our hands. Accordingly, just as
it is reasonable to yield to arguments that have been carefully
weighed and examined, so is it hazardous to mistake what is
not known for what is known. When conclusions are fre-
quently undermined, which we thought would hold up and
endure, there is danger that we may fall into such a hostile
and distrustful attitude towards reason as to make it appear
that we should not trust even the clearest evidence of truth.?

32, But come, let us quickly reconsider now whether
you were right to regard these conclusions as doubtful. Sup-
pose now that someone unfamiliar with the business of snar-
ing birds, which is done with reeds and birdlime, should en-
counter a bird-catcher fitted out with all his equipment,
though he is not snaring birds but simply going on his way.
At the sight of him, he quickens his pace and, as is usually
the case, reflects and, in amazement, asks himself the meaning
of the man’s paraphernalia. Suppose, too, that the bird-
catcher, aware that the other's attention is fixed upon him,
and eager to show off his prowess, releases the reeds and, with
his rod and hawk, snares a little bird which he sees nearby
which he comes up to and captures. Would he not, I ask you,

2 Augustine may have in mind Socrates’ warning to avoid uncritical
assent to arguments which later appear inconclusive and thus expose
the inquirer to the danger of distrusting the power of reason to
discover truth. (Cf. Phaedo 80-90c.) More likely, he is recalling his
own experience when, following his disillusionment with the Mani-
chaean sect, he inclined for a time towards the kind of skepticism pro-
fessed by the New Academy. The first work composed after his con-
version, Contra Academicos, is a lengthy refutation of this doctrine
which he regarded as the most pernicious of errors. Cf. Retract. 1.1.1.

46 SAINT AUGUSTINE

teach that spectator of his what he was so eager to know, not
by any sign, but by the reality itself?

Ad. I am afraid we are confronted here with a situation
similar to that where I referred to the man who asks what
walking is. Neither do I think that everything about bird-
catching has been made known even in the present case.

Aug. It is an easy matter to put your mind at ease. I will
make the further qualification, that if the spectator were in-
telligent enough, he could grasp everything there is to know
about the art of bird-catching from what he saw. It is suffi-
cient for our purpose that some men can be taught some
things, though not all, without the usé of signs.

Ad. I too could further qualify my remarks by saying that
if one is really intelligent, he will learn all about walking as
soon as someone indicates it to him, by taking a few steps.

Aug. You may make that qualification as far as I am con-
cerned. I not only have no objection, but am even favorable
to it. You see, in fact, that we have both reached the con-
clusion that some things can be taught without the use of
signs, and that we were wrong in thinking a little while ago
that nothing at all can be taught without signs. Actually, these
examples bring to mind, not one or two, but thousands of
things, which are made known by themselves without having
to resort to signs. Why, I ask, should we have any doubt of
this? For, apart from the numerous plays performed in every
theater by actors who play their part by enacting the events
themselves, without using signs, does not God, as well as
nature, exhibit and manifest to the view of all, and just as
they are, the sun and the light which covers and clothes all
the things around us, the moon and the other stars, the earth
and sea, and all the countless things which they bring forth?

33. Now if we examine the matter more carefully, per-
haps you will discover that nothing is learned by means of its
signs. For when I am shown a sign, it cannot teach me any-
thing if it finds me ignorant of the reality for which the sign
THE TEACHER 47

stands; but if it finds me acquainted with the reality, what do
I learn from the sign? When I read this, for example: “And
their saraballae were not changed,"? the word "saraballae"
does not convey to me the thing it signifies. If it is some kind
of head-covering that goes by this name, did I, upon hearing
the word, come to learn either what "head" or "covering"
means? These things 1 knew before, and I came to know
them, not when they were called these names by others, but
when I saw them by myself. Indeed, when the sound of the
two-syllable word caput [head] first struck my ears, I was just
as ignorant of what it signified as when I first heard or read
the word "saraballae." But, after frequent repetitions of the
word "head," I discovered, by paying careful attention at the
time it was used, that this was the word for something that
was well known to me by sight. Before discovering it, the word
was only a sound so far as I was concerned. I came to know it
as a sign when I discovered the reality of which it is a sign.
And I learned what this reality was, not, as I have said, by any
sign, but by looking at it. Hence, it is more of a matter of the
sign being learned from the thing we know, than it is of
knowing the thing itself from the manifestation of its sign.

34. To grasp this point more clearly, let us pretend that we
now hear the word “head” for the first time, and, not knowing
whether it is merely a vocal sound or whether it also signifies
something, we inquire what “head” is. Remember now, we
want to become acquainted, not with the thing signified, but
with the sign itself, which we actually do not know as long
as we do not know the thing it signifies. But if the reality is
pointed out to us while we are inquiring about it, it is by
seeing this reality that we learn its sign, which we had heard
before but had not understood, But since there are two

3 Dan. 3.94. The term sarabarae, or as the Vulgate reads, sarabala,
occurs in the account of the three youths in the fiery furnace, The
expression Et sarabala eorum non fuissent immutata . . ., is rendered
by the Douay version “. . . nor their garments altered * The ob-
scurity of the term itself only serves to illustrate Augustine's thesis
that words of themselves can teach us nothing about things.

48 SAINT AUGUSTINE

things about this sign, namely, the sound and its meaning,
we certainly do not perceive the sound because it is a sign,
but, by the very fact that it strikes the ear, whereas its mean-
ing is perceived by looking at the reality it signifies. For the
pointing of the finger can signify nothing else but the reality
to which it is pointed, not towards the sign, but towards a
member of the body which we call the head. Consequently, by
means of this pointing, I learn neither the reality, which I
already knew, nor the sign, towards which the finger was not
pointed.

But I am not too much concerned about this matter of
pointing the finger since, as I see it, this is more of a sign of
what indicating is itself than it is of any of the things being
indicated. It is like our use of the adverb ecce [look!]. Even
when we use this adverb, we usually point our finger too, just
in case the one sign is not sufficient to indicate the object. The
point I am trying most of all to make you see, if I can, is this,
that we learn nothing from signs which we call words. For,
as I have pointed out, it is rather a question of learning the
sense of the word, that is, the meaning hidden in the sound,
from a previous knowledge of the reality signified than it is
of perceiving that reality from a sign of this kind.

35. And I might also have said the same thing regarding
“coverings” and other countless things as I said about the
word “head.” Yet, though I already know what these are, I
still do not know what those saraballae are. If someone were
to signify them to me by a gesture, or should draw a picture of
them or show me something like them, I will not say that he
did not teach me what they were, which I could easily prove
if I wanted to speak at somewhat greater length. But I do say
what is very much to the point, that he did not teach me this
by means of words. But if he happens to be looking at them
in my presence, and should call my attention to them by
saying: “Look, saraballae,” I will learn something new, not by
my words that were spoken, but by looking at the reality.
THE TEACHER 49

And it was this that also enabled me to become acquainted
with the word and to remember its meaning. Certainly, when
I learned to know the reality, I did not rely upon the words
of another, but upon my own eyes, though I did possibly
rely upon words to direct my attention, that is, to see what
there was to see by looking.

Chapter 11

36. So far, the most I can say for words is that they merely
intimate that we should look for realities; they do not present
them to us for our knowledge. But the man who teaches me
is one who presents to my eyes or to any bodily sense, or even
to the mind itself, something that I wish to know. So by means
of words we learn only words, or better, the sound and noise
of words. For if something cannot be a word unless it is a
sign, I still cannot recognize it as a word until I know what it
signifies, even though I have heard the word. Accordingly, it
is by knowing the realities that we also come to a knowledge
of their words, whereas, by the sound of words, we do not even
learn the words. For we cannot learn words we already know,
and, as for those which we do not know, we cannot profess
to have learned them until we have seen their meaning. And
this comes about, not by hearing the sounds they make, but
from a knowledge of the realities they signify. It is perfectly
logical and true to conclude that whenever words are spoken,
we either know what they mean or we do not. If we know,
they recall rather than teach something to us; if we do not
know, they cannot even recall something, though they may
lead us to inquire.

37. You may insist that we cannot really know what those
head-coverings are except by seeing them, since the name is
only a sound for us, and that we can know no more about
the name itself unless we know what the realities are. And yet,
50 SAINT AUGUSTINE

we do accept as true the story of those boys: how their faith
triumphed over the king and the flames, how they sang a
hymn of praise to God and were found worthy to receive
honors even from their very enemy. Have we learned all this
otherwise than by words? I shall reply by noting that we al-
ready knew everything that those words signified. What is
meant by “three boys,” “furnace,” “fire,” “king,” and, finally,
“unharmed by fire,” as well as the other things signified by
those words, this I already knew. On the other hand, the
names Ananias, Azarius, and Misael are just as much un-
known to me as the saraballae. These names did not help me
at all to know them, nor could they possibly do so. But that
everything recounted in that story occurred at that time
exactly as recorded, that, I admit, is something I “believe”
rather than "know," and those same men, whose word we be-
lieve, were themselves not ignorant of this distinction! For
the Prophet says: "Unless you believe, you shall not under-
stand,"? which he really could not have said if he thought
that there was no difference between the two. Hence, what
I understand, that I also believe, although I do not also
understand everything I believe. Also, everything I under-
stand, I know, though I do not know everything I believe.
Nor do I for that reason fail to see how useful it is also to
believe many things which I do not know, including also this
account of the three boys. Accordingly, while there are a

1 Here the term "know" (scire), as opposed to "believe" (credere), indi-
cates an immediate and certain cognitive awareness of realities present
to the knower. In Letter 147, Augustine makes a similar distinction be-
tween "see" (videre) and "believe," as relating to a knowledge of things
"present" and "absent," respectively. A further distinction is drawn in
The Trinity between scientia, knowledge of things temporal, and
sapientia, knowledge of things eternal. For further connotations of
these terms, cf. H. I, Marrou, Saint Augustin et la fin de la culture

antique (Paris 1938) 561-569.

2 Isa. 79, The Septuagint rendering of the text is of capital importance
for Augustine's teaching on the primacy of faith and on the role of
reason to penetrate the meaning of revealed truth. In a letter to
Consentius (Ep. 120), he presents a summary of the relation between
faith and reason.
THE TEACHER 51

great many things that I am unable to know, I do nevertheless
know how useful it is to believe them.?

38. But as for all those things which we “understand,”
it is not the outward sound of the speaker’s words that we
consult, but the truth which presides‘ over the mind itself
from within, though we may have been led to consult it be-
cause of the words, Now He who is consulted and who is
said to “dwell in the inner man,"5 He it is who teaches us,
namely, Christ, that is to say, “the unchangeable Power of
God and everlasting wisdom."9 This is the Wisdom which
every rational soul does indeed consult, but it reveals itself
to each according to his capacity to grasp it by reason of the
good or evil dispositions of his will? And if the soul is some-
times mistaken, this does not come about because of any
defect on the part of the truth it consulted, just as it is not
through any defect in the light outside us that our bodily
eyes are often deceived. We acknowledge that it is this light
which we consult with regard to visible objects so that it
may manifest them to us according to our capacity to perceive
them.

vo

Shortly after his ordination to the priesthood in 391, Augustine wrote
The Üsefulness of Belief. Yt is dedicated to his friend Honoratus whom
he had converted from paganism to Manichaeism during his own
proselytizing days in the sect. It seems that Augustine was less suc-
cessful in winning his friend over to the Catholic faith.

A favorite expression employed by Augustine to describe the action
of the "inner light" upon the soul in its perception of truth.

Cf. Eph. 3.14-17.

CE. 1 Cor. 1.28-24.

From his reading of the Platonic writers, including Plotinus, and
quite probably Porphyry, Augustine had come to understand the role
of moral dispositions in the attainment of truth. His earlier en-
thusiasm for this philosophy occasionally gave rise to such exaggera-
tions as this, that truth can only be seen by the pure of heart (cf.
Solil. 1.1.21). While this extreme view is expressly repudiated in the
Retractations (14.2), he continued to insist upon moral rectitude as a
necessary condition for understanding revealed truth, a position well
summarized in his statement that mores perducunt ad intelligentiam
(Tractatus in evangelium Ioannis 18.5.7).

-

EET
52 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 12

39. Now if we consult light for colors, and consult the basic
elements! of the material world which comprise those bodies
known by the senses regarding the other sense qualities, and
consult the senses themselves which the mind uses as inter-
preters? to know these things; if, again, we use our reason to
consult that inner truth for the things that we understand—
then what more could be said by way of proof to show that
we learn nothing by means of words, except their sound which
strikes the ear? For everything we perceive, we perceive either
by the bodily sense or by the mind. We call the former, sense
objects, the latter, intelligible objects; or, to appropriate the
terminology of our own inspired Writers, we call the first
carnal, the second, spiritual. When asked about the former,
we can reply if what we perceive is present to us, as when

1 A reference to the doctrine of the “four elements,” earth, air, fire, and
water. According to Empedocles, these clements, or “roots,” are the
eternal and changeless principles which combine and separate to
account for the generation and corruption of bodies. Augustine will
later make use of this teaching in his doctrine of the "seminal reasons"
in an attempt to reconcile the uniqueness of God's creative act with
the progressive appearance of new forms of li!

2 Augustine's characterization of the senses as "interpreters" or "mes-

sengers" of the mind reflects the Plotinian body-soul relation as con-

ceived within a hicrarchically-ordered universe which rigidly excludes
any direct causal action of lower things upon those higher. In con-
trast with the Aristotelico-Thomistic view that sentire est compositi,
Augustine maintains that the soul alone is the proper cause of sensa-
tion: neque enim corpus sentit, sed anima per corpus, quo velut
nuntio utitur ad formandum in seipsa quod extrinsecus nuntiatur (De
genesi ad litteram 122451). For a good exposition of the Augustinian
theory of sensation, including several points at variance with Plotinus,
cf. M. A. Gannon, “The Active Theory of Sensation in Saint Augus-
tine,” The New Scholasticism 30 (1956) 154-180.
In a work of the same period, Augustine had stated that the Platonists
had only to change a few of their expressions and views to become
Christians (cf. The True Religion 4.7). Here, too, he purports to see
only a verbal difference between the Platonists and “our own authors,”
namely, the inspired writers. Again, in his review of the Dialogue,

On Order, he insists that there is no real difference between Plato's

“intelligible world" and "the eternal and unchangeable Wisdom by

which God made the world" (cf. Retract. 1.3.2) .

Á
THE TEACHER 53

someone asks us about the phase and position of the new
moon while we are looking at it. If my questioner in this
instance does not see the moon, he believes my words, though
often he does not. In no case, however, does he really learn
unless he sees for himself the thing we are talking about. He
learns it then, not indeed by the sound of the spoken words,
but by the things themselves and his senses. For the words
sound the same to one who sees the object as they do to one
who does not see it. But when questions are asked, not about
things we perceive while they are present to us, but about
those which our senses perceived on former occasions, then
our words do not refer to the things themselves, but to the
images impressed by them upon the senses and stored away
in the memory. And, since we are reflecting upon what is
unreal, I fail to see how we can possibly speak of them as true,
unless it be for the fact that we are recounting, not what we
see and perceive at the moment, but what we have already
seen and perceived. So it is that we bear these images in the
deep recesses of the memory as witnesses, so to speak, of
things previously experienced by the senses. When reflecting
upon these images in our mind, we can speak of them in
good conscience, without lying. But these images are only
witnesses for ourselves. If the one who hears what I am re-
counting has seen these things for himself and was there on
the spot, he does not learn them from my words but recog-
nizes them himself by the images he took away with him from
these things. But if he has not experienced them with his
senses, then it is clearly a matter of his believing my words
rather than of learning.

40. But when it is a question of things which we behold
with the mind, namely, with our intellect and reason, we give
verbal expression to realities which we directly perceive as

4 Augustine's later treatment of memory in the Confessions (10.8-27)
represents a notable and original contribution to this area of psy-
chological inquiry. The subject is again discussed in The Trinity
(117-1).
54 SAINT AUGUSTINE

present in that inner light of truth® by which the inner man,
as he is called, is enlightened and made happy. But, here
again, if the one who hears my words sees those things himself
with that clear and inner eye of the soul, he knows the things
whereof I speak by contemplating them himself, and not by
my words. Therefore, even when I say what is true, and he
sees what is true, it is not I who teach him. For he is being
taught, not by my words, but by the realities themselves made
manifest to him by the enlightening action of God from
within. Consequently, he could also answer questions about
these things if he were asked. What more absurd than the
notion that he is being taught by what I say, when he could
explain those very things even before I spoke, if only he had
been asked about them?

But as for the case frequently encountered where someone
replies to a question in the negative and is led on by other
questions to answer in the affirmative, this springs from a
weakness in one’s mental perception which makes it impos-
sible for him to consult that light regarding the matter in
its entirety. He is led on to consider it part by part when
questioned about those very same parts comprising the whole,
which he was unable to perceive in its entirety. If he is
brought around to this by the words of his questioner, the
words still do not teach him, but only propose questions in a
way suited to his capacity to learn from his inner light. For
example, if I should ask you about the very matter now under

5 This expression of the Saint's teaching on “divine illumination" is
notable for the absence of any vestiges of Platonic “reminiscence.” In
Question 46 of the Eighty-Three Diverse Questions, composed during
this same period, Augustine integrated his teaching on illumination
with that on the Divine Ideas as follows: “To the degree that the
rational soul is united to Him by charity, by so much does it contem-
plate these intelligible principles (rationes), through whose vision it is
made supremely appy being bathed, so to speak, and illumined by
Him with spiritual light." For several recent interpretations of this
difficult doctrine, cf. C. Schützinger, “Die augustinische Erkenntnislehre
in Lichte neurer Forschung,” Recherches Augustiniennes 2 (1962)
177-203; L. Cilleruelo, "Pro memoria Dei," Revue des études augus-
tiniennes 12 (1966) 65-84.

THE TEACHER 55

consideration, namely, whether anything can be taught by
means of words, the question might appear to you absurd at
first because you are unable to see the whole problem. Con-
sequently, I would have to frame the question in a way suited
to your capacity to hear that Teacher who teaches from
within, Where, I might ask, have you learned all those things
which you admitted were true as I was speaking, and which
you think you now know for sure? You might reply that I
was the one who had taught them to you. Suppose then, by
way of questioning you further, I were to tell you that I had
seen a man flying. Would my words give you the same cer-
tainty as if you were to hear me say that wise men are better
than fools? You would of course deny this, and answer that
you do not believe my first statement, or that even if you
do believe it, you do not know it, whereas you know the
other statement to be absolutely certain. This would surely
enable you to see that you had not learned anything by my
words, whether, as in the one instance, where you did not
know what I was speaking of, or in the other, where you
understood perfectly well. As a matter of fact, if you had been
asked about those statements separately, you could have even
sworn that you did not know the former and that you did
know the latter. Then indeed you would admit as true the
proposition in its entirety which you had denied, since you
would now have a clear and certain grasp of all that it in-
volves. It is this: Whenever we express anything in words,
our hearer either does not know whether it is true, or he
knows it is untrue, or he knows it is true. In the first of these
three, it is a matter of belief or opinion or doubt; in the
second, of opposition and denial; in the third, of attesting
to what is true. In none of these cases, therefore, does he learn.
It follows, therefore, that one who does not grasp the reality
after hearing our words, or who knows that what he heard is
untrue, or who could have given the same answer, if asked,
has learned nothing by any words of mine.
56 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 13

41. It further follows that where realities discerned by
the mind are concerned, it is of no avail for one who does
not perceive them to hear the words of one who does, except
when it is useful to believe them so long as he lacks knowledge
of them. But anyone who is able to perceive them is an in-
ward disciple of the truth and an outward judge of the
speaker, or better, a judge of what he is saying. For he very
often understands what was said even when the speaker him-
self does not. Let us suppose, for example, that someone who
takes the word of the Epicureans and judges that the soul is
mortal, should expound arguments which have been advanced
by the wiser philosophers in favor of its immortality. If some-
one capable of spiritual discernment happens to hear him, he
will judge that what this man says is true, whereas the speaker
does not know whether such arguments are true; in fact, he
even thinks they are completely false. Are we, then, to think
of him as teaching what he does not know? Yet he uses the
same words which could also be used by one who understood
them.

42. Hence, not even the role of expressing what the speaker
has in mind is any longer left to words, since it is not certain
that he knows what he is saying. There are, in addition, those
who lie and deceive, so that you can readily see from them
how words not only do not reveal their thoughts, but even
conceal them. I have no doubt whatever that the words of
truthful men are an attempt and a sort of pledge to reveal the
thoughts of the speaker, and that they would succeed in this,
as all agree, if only liars were not allowed to speak.

Yet, we have often observed, both in ourselves and in
others, that words are spoken which do not express the
thoughts in one's mind. I see two ways that this can happen,
either some kind of speech, frequently repeated and mem-
orized, flows out of the speaker's mouth while he is thinking
THE TEACHER 57

of something else, as often happens to us when we are singing
a hymn; or, unintentionally, and by a slip of the tongue,
some words are blurted out instead of others, so that in this
case too, the words which are heard are not signs of what
is in our mind. Liars, of course, also think of what they are
saying, so that while we may not know whether what they
say is true, we know nevertheless that they are saying what is
in their mind, provided that neither of the two things I just
mentioned happens to them, If someone contends that these
things happen only occasionally and that it is obvious when-
ever they do, I will not object. Yet they often go unrecognized
and have frequently deceived me as I listened to them.

43. But in addition to these cases where words do not con-
vey their meaning, there is another kind, quite widespread,
to be sure, and the source of endless bickering and disputes.
It happens when the speaker actually says what he is thinking,
but often does so only to himself and some others, while he
does not convey the same meaning to the person spoken to,
or to others as well. Suppose, for example, that someone
should say in our hearing that man is surpassed in virtue by
certain brute animals. We find ourselves at once unable to
countenance such a remark and we spare no effort to refute
so false and pernicious a view. The speaker, however, may be
using the word "virtue" to signify physical strength to ex-
press what he has in mind. He is neither lying nor mistaken
about the facts themselves. Neither is he spinning out words
committed to memory, while he has his mind on something
else, or is saying something different from what is on his mind
by a slip of the tongue. He is merely indicating his thoughts
by a different name than we do. We would agree with him at
once on this point if we could read his thoughts, which he has
as yet been unable to reveal to us, even though he has already
made use of words to set forth his view.

"They tell me that definitions can correct errors of this kind.
Accordingly, if the speaker in this instance should define what
58 SAINT AUGUSTINE

“virtue” is, it would become apparent, so they say, that the
dispute is not over the reality, but over the word. Even
granting that this is the case, how many can you find who are
good at defining? Besides, many points have been urged
against the rules of definition, which it is not opportune to
consider here, and with which I do not even entirely agree.

44, I pass over the fact that we fail to hear many words dis-
tinctly and enter into extended and heated arguments, just
as if we had heard them. A short time ago, for instance, when
I remarked that a certain word in the Punic tongue! meant
“mercy,” you stated that you had heard from those better
acquainted with that language that it meant “piety.” But I
disagreed, insisting that you had completely forgotten what
you had heard. For I thought you had said not “piety” but
“faith,” even though you were seated close to me and though
these two words do not sound so much alike that they would
deceive my hearing. Yet I thought for some time that you
did not know what had been said to you, when all the while
it was I who did not know what you had said. For if I had
heard you correctly, I would never have thought it incon-
gruous that “piety” and “mercy” should be expressed by the
one word in the Punic language.

Such cases occur quite frequently, but I will, as I said, pass
over them so as not to give the impression that I am censur-
ing words unfairly because of carelessness or even deafness
on the part of men who hear them. The cases I cited above
are more perplexing, where we cannot know the speaker's
thoughts, even though we share the same language and the
words spoken in Latin are heard very distinctly.

1 Although the Roman conquest of North Africa was completed in
146 B.C, the Punic language survived and continued in usage even
in St. Augustines day. Cf. W. Green, "Augustine's Use of Punic,”
University of California Publications in Semitic Philology 1l (1951)
179-190; J. Lecerf, "Notule sur saint Augustin et les survivances
puniques,” Augustinus Magister (Paris 1954) 1.31-33.
THE TEACHER 59

45. See, I am going to yield to a point and grant that when
words are heard by one acquainted with them, he can know
that the speaker has been thinking about the things they
signify, But does he thereby likewise learn that what was said
is true, which is the question under discussion?

Chapter 14

Do teachers ever claim that it is their own thoughts that are
grasped and retained, rather than the branches of learning
themselves which they purport to transmit by their speaking?
What foolish curiosity could ever prompt a man to send his
child to school in order to have him learn what the teacher
thinks? But when teachers have made use of words to explain
all those branches of learning which they profess to be teach-
ing, including even those dealing with virtue and wisdom,
then those who are known as pupils reflect within themselves
whether what has been said is true, contemplating, that is,
that inner truth according to their capacity. It is then, there-
fore, that they learn. And when they discover within them-
selves that what has been said is true, they praise their teach-
ers, unaware that they are not so much praising the teachers
as they are praising those who have been taught, provided,
however, that the teachers also know what they are saying. But
men make the mistake of calling people "teachers" when they
are not that at all, because there is generally no interval of
time between the moment of speaking and that of knowing,
and because their coming to learn from within follows quickly
upon the suggestive force of the speaker's words, they think
that they have learned externally from him who spoke those
words.

46. We shall, God willing, resume our inquiry on another
60 SAINT AUGUSTINE

occasion into the whole question of the usefulness of words,!
which is one of no small importance if you look into it care-
fully. For the present, I have cautioned you that we must not
ascribe more importance to words than is their due. Ac-
cordingly, we should no longer merely believe, but also begin
to understand the truth of those words based on divine au-
thority, that we should not call any man on earth a teacher,
seeing that “there is One in heaven who is the Teacher of
all"? What is meant by "in heaven" is something that will be
taught us by Him who directs us even through human agen-
cies and external signs to turn inwardly to Him for our in-
struction, To love Him and to know Him, that is the happy
life, which all proclaim they are seeking, but few there are
who can rejoice at having really found it. But now I would
like you to tell me what you think of this entire discourse of
mine. For if you know that what was said is true, then, had
you been questioned about each particular point, you would
have declared that you know them too. So you can see from
Whom it was that you learned these things. It was not from
me, for you could have answered to everything I was asking
you. But if you did not know that what I said was true, then
neither He nor I have taught you. Not I, because I can never
teach you; not He, because you are not yet able to learn these
things.

Ad. 1 myself have come to learn through the suggestive
power of your words that words merely stimulate a man to
learn, and that the words of the speaker seldom reveal his
thoughts to any great extent. But as to the truth of what is
said, I have also learned that He alone teaches who made

1 The project was never realized, possibly because of Augustine's failure
to complete the treatises on the liberal arts which he had planned
and begun at Milan while preparing for baptism. Only the works on
grammar and music were ever completed, the latter at Tagaste. Nothing
of the remaining works on dialectics, rhetoric, geometry and phil-
osophy, not even the completed work on grammar, had survived when
the aged Bishop undertook the review of his books about 427. Cf.
Retract. 1.6.

2 Matt. 23.9.
THE TEACHER 61

use of external words to remind us that He dwells within us.
With His help, I shall now love Him all the more ardently
as I advance in learning. I am grateful, however, that your
remarks have continued without interruption, particularly
because they anticipated and answered all the objections I
was prepared to raise. You have not neglected a single question
that had caused me to doubt, or which has not been answered
for me by that inner Oracle? exactly as you had expressed it
in words.

8 Although generally used by Augustine to indicate the Sacred Scriptures,
the term "oracle" in this context seems rather to refer to the "inner
"Teacher" just identified with the "One in heaven who is the Teacher
of all.

THE FREE CHOICE OF
THE WILL

(De libero arbitrio)
INTRODUCTION

AINT AUGUSTINE's De libero arbitrio is the last and
most important in the series of Dialogues begun after
: his conversion to the Catholic faith in the late sum-
mer of 386. While preparing for baptism at the country villa
of Cassiciacum, not far from Milan, the neo-convert con-
ducted discussions of a predominantly philosophical nature
in the company of his mother, Monica, his son, Adeodatus, and
a few pupils and friends. To this earliest literary period
belong the Dialogues, Contra Academicos, De beata vita, and
De ordine, which deal, respectively, with the problem of cer-
titude, human happiness, Divine Providence and the problem
of evil. Next in order is the Soliloquia,! a kind of contrived
dialogue between Augustine's reason and himself, in which
the two questions basic to Augustinian philosophy are ex-
amined, namely, God and the soul? The problem of the im-
mortality of the soul is discussed more fully in his next work,
De immortalitate animae, composed at Milan, though not in
dialogue form, while Augustine was a candidate for baptism.
A further study on the soul, De quantitate animae, was
written the following year at Rome shortly before Augustine's
return to Africa. While a member of the small lay-community
which he had established in his native town of Tagaste,
Augustine composed the well-known dialogue, De magistro,
which reproduces discussions with his son, Adeodatus, on the
function of language and the role of the teacher in learning,
including some of his earliest statements on the celebrated

1 Augustine himself coined the term soliloquia. Cf. Soliloquia 2.7.14;
Retract. 1.4.1.

2 Translations of these four Dialogues are available in Vol. [5] of this
series (Writings of St. Augustine I, New York 1948).

65
66 SAINT AUGUSTINE

doctrine of divine illumination. Although begun at Rome
between 387 and 388, the De libero arbitrio was not com-
pleted until after his ordination to the priesthood at Hippo
in 391. With the completion of this work, not later than 395,
there comes to an end the so-called philosophical period of
Augustine’s writings which, for the most part, contain per-
sonal reflections upon the great themes of classical philosophy,
examined in the light of a reason already illumined by the
Christian revelation.

The De libero arbitrio is among Augustine’s first works
against the Manichees in a prolonged polemic extending over
a period of almost twenty years. It is not surprising that his
first polemic should have been directed against the very sys-
tem which had won his allegiance for nearly ten years, and
which continued to pose a serious threat to the Catholic faith,
not only in North Africa, but throughout the whole Roman
Empire. In this work, Augustine readily acknowledges that
the facile and convenient solution of the problem of evil
proposed by the Manichees had been a powerful factor in his
decision to join the sect in his twentieth year According to
the metaphysical dualism of Manes, man was composed of
two antagonistic elements derived from two eternal and con-
flicting principles of Light and Darkness, corresponding to
Good and Evil respectively. Accordingly, the conflict in man
between good and evil represented merely one aspect of the
universal conflict between these ultimate cosmic forces which,
in effect, exonerated man from any moral responsibility for
his conduct.* The principal scope of the De libero arbitrio
is a refutation of this dualistic doctrine, with special reference
to the nature and origin of moral evil, and to the created

3 124.

4 The best modern exposition of Manichacism is that by H. C. Puech,
Le Manichéisme: son fondateur, sa doctrine (Paris 1949). A good
English account, based largely upon the former, is found in the recent
biography by G. Bonner, Saint Augustine of Hippo: Life and Con-
troversies (London 1963) 157-192. Cf. also J. Ries, "Manichaeism,"
New Catholic Encyclopaedia, 9.153-160.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 67

will as its sole and adequate cause. As early as 386, Augustine
had raised the problem of evil from the standpoint of a uni-
versal providence in the dialogue, De ordine, but had to
abandon the original plan of the work almost from the start,
owing to the inability of his youthful pupils to cope with so
difficult a problem at the time. As a result, these two books
deal largely with the proper order to be observed in studies
so that the mind may pass more securely from the considera-
tion of things corporeal to the contemplation of incorporeal
reality.5

When Augustine had completed the De libero arbitrio, he
little realized that some of his own weapons employed against
the Manichees would, ironically, be turned upon him during
a later polemic that was to occupy the last twenty years of
his life. It was at Rome, about the year 410, that the future
heresiarch, Pelagius, first came upon this striking sentence
from the tenth book of Augustine's Confessions: "Grant what
thou dost command, and command what thou wilt.” Pelagius,
we are told, was infuriated by this implicit denial of man’s
moral sufficiency and took sharp issue with his companion,
a friend of Augustine, who had quoted the passage to him.
The whole affair is described in De dono perseverantiae® by
Augustine, who dates the origin of the Pelagian controversy
from this episode.

In essence, the doctrine of Pelagius involved a denial of
the absolute gratuity and necessity of grace for man’s moral
perfection, based upon the conviction that man can fulfill
the Law perfectly and merit salvation by his own unaided
will. As the controversy progressed, Pelagius occasionally
made the concession that grace might make it easier for a

5 Cf. Retract. 1.3.1. The Retractations, in two books, present a general
review of Augustine's works, excluding the Letters and Sermons. The
true scope of this work, composed between 426 and 427, is more ac-
curately conveyed by the title De recensione librorum, indicated by
Possidius, Augustine's first biographer; cf. his Vita 28 (translated in
this series, Vol. 15 [New York 1952] 108) .

6 20.53.
68 SAINT AUGUSTINE

man to lead a good life, but this in no way altered his essen-
tial position that man alone is the cause of his own salvation.*
From the notion of moral sufficiency, Pelagius was logically
Jed to a denial of original sin and of the necessity for baptism.

From the very beginning of the controversy, Pelagius strong-
ly insisted that his teaching on man’s freedom and natural
capacity to merit salvation were in substantial agreement
with the views expressed by Augustine in the De libero
arbitrio, and that Augustine had abandoned these in favor of
a later and novel doctrine on grace. To support the charge
Pelagius cleverly extracted a number of passages from the
Dialogue, which he interpreted in favor of man’s moral
suffering. In the general review of his books, the Retractations
(426-427), the aged Bishop insists upon the following points
in his defense against this Pelagian accusation. First, there is
no doctrinal incompatability between his early teaching on
free will and his later and more explicit teaching on grace.
And, since he was occupied at the time in refuting the Mani-
chees, it was sufficient to establish that, while God is the sole
and supreme Cause of all that exists, He is not the Author of
evil, which has its adequate cause in the created will. Secondly,
though the emphasis in the Dialogue is on man's free will,
there are explicit references to grace, and an even larger
number of passages where the doctrine is clearly implied.
Augustine further insists that certain passages of the De
libero arbitrio would appear even to have anticipated the
later errors of Pelagius. The Saint's grave concern to vindicate
his doctrinal consistency and to exonerate the Dialogue from
any Pelagian interpretation, is evidenced by the minute and
extensive treatment accorded this work in the Retractations.®

Several factors may explain the importance and lasting
value of this early work on free will. It is not only one of the
earliest, but also one of his more definitive refutations of basic
Manichaean doctrine. In a letter to Jerome, some twenty years

7 Ct. Ep. 186.
8 A translation of the relevant chapter is found below, pp. 235-241.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 69

later, Augustine states that the book was widely circulated
from the time it appeared, and that it is still read by many.®
Earlier he had recommended it to his Manichaean adversary,
Secundinus, against whom he wrote about the year 406.1°
Again, owing to the comprehensive scope of the subject matter
treated in connection with the central theme, the work
emerges as a kind of compendium of Augustinian philosophy,
which is the main reason why it has survived its usefulness
as a mere anti-Manichaean polemic. An eminent French
scholar has called it the most mature and solid of all the
earlier Dialogues and writings of the Saint.*

In addition to its principal theme, freedom of the will and
the origin of moral evil, those three books resume and develop
more fully a number of philosophical notions found in the
earlier Dialogues. As a result, there is scarcely a single topic
of major importance for philosophy that is not brought to
bear in some way on the central and unifying theme. Subjects
discussed include the existence of certitude, the internal and
external senses, being and its properties, the theory of il-
lumination, the spirituality and immortality of the soul,
beatitude, eternal and natural law, and the virtues. Par-
ticularly noteworthy is Augustine's celebrated proof for God's
existence in the second book, the most detailed and systematic
exposition of the argument to be found in all his works.
Finally, there is the characteristic and important teaching on
the relation of faith to reason and on the role of faith in the
development of what may be termed a Christian philosophy.
'The Dialogue itself represents an early and faithful illustra-
tion of the familiar Augustinian principle "believe that you
may understand,”!? which centuries later would find its de-
finitive and well-known formulation in Anselm's "Credo ut
intelligam."

9 Ep. 166.3.7.

10 Contra Secundinum 11.

11 C. Boyer, in Gregorianum 20 (1939) 449.
12 Tractatus in evangelium Ioannis 29.6.
70 SAINT AUGUSTINE

From the testimony of the Retractations, it is clear that the
three books entitled De libero arbitrio resulted from dis-
cussions held during Augustine's second sojourn in Rome the
year before his final return to North Africa, late in 388.13
The first book, and quite probably the first part of book two,
were completed at Rome; the remaining parts of book two
and the third book were not completed until about 395, four
years after Augustine's ordination to the priesthood at Hippo
Regius in 391. Despite the silence on the part of the manu-
script tradition and the Retractations concerning the identity
of Augustine's interlocutor, his Letter to Evodius, written
in 415, seems to leave no reasonable doubt that it was the
latter. According to the Confessions, our main source for
a knowledge of his early years, Evodius was, like Augustine,
a native of Tagaste, and had served in the military before
his conversion to the Catholic faith in Milan.5 He accom-
panied Augustine to Cassiciacum in the late summer of 386,
and was present at Monica's death at Ostia the following
year.18 He then returned with Augustine to Rome for a year,
where he participated in the two Dialogues, De quantitate
animae and De libero arbitrio. Upon returning to Africa, he
lived with Augustine both at Tagaste and at Hippo until his
appointment as Bishop of Uzala in 396.

The present translation has been made from the critical text
edited by William M. Green, in Corpus scriptorum eccle-
siasticorum latinorum 74 (Vienna 1956) .17

13 191

14 1622. The remaining extant correspondence between Augustine and
Evodius includes the following: Augustine to Evodius, Letters 159,
164, 169; Evodius to Augustine, Letters 158, 160, 163.

15 98.17.

16 9.12.31.

17 The traditional division into chapters and sections has been used,
however, in preference to Green's new system of sectioning.

THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 7

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

Text:

Maurist Edition: Sancti Augustini Hipponensis episcopi Opera 1
(Paris 1689) 569-642. Reproduced, with some variants, by:

Migne, J. P. Patrologia Latina 32 (Paris 1861) 1221-1303.

Green, W. Corpus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum 74 (Vienna
1956).

Translations:

Baravalle, G. Sant" Agostino: Il libero arbitrio (Rome 1960).
Benjamin, A., L. Hackstaff. On Free Choice of the Will (The Library
of Liberal Arts; Indianapolis-New York-Kansas City 1964).
Burleigh, J. H. S. "On Free Will" Augustine: Earlier Writings (The
Library of Christian Classics 6; Philadelphia 1958) 102-217.
Montanari, P. Aurelius Augustinus: IL “De libero arbitrio" (Rome

1939).

Perl, C. Aurelius Augustinus: Der freie Wille (8 ed. Paderborn 1962).

Pontifex, M. The Problem of Free Choice (Ancient Christian Writers
22; Westminster, Md, 1955).

Seijas, E. Del libre albedrio (Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos 21:
Obras de San Agustin 3 [Madrid 1947] 235-521).

Sparrow, C. Saint Augustine on Free Will (Richmond, Va. 1947).

Thimme, W. Augustinus, Theologische Frühschriften: Vom freien
Willen, Von der wahren Religion (Bibliothek der Alten Welt,
Reihe Antike und Christentum; Zürich-Stuttgart 1962).

Thonnard, J. Du libre arbitre (Bibliotheque Augustinienne: Oeuvres
de saint Augustin 6.8 [2 ed. Paris 1952] 123-481).

Tourscher, F. The Free Choice of the Will (Philadelphia 1937).

Secondary Works:

Clark, M. Saint Augustine, Philosopher of Freedom (New York 1958).
Cotta, 8. “Droit et justice dans le De libero arbitrio de saint Augustin,”
‘Archiv für Rechts- und Sozialphilosophie 47 (1961) 159-172.

De Lubac, H. "Note sur saint Augustin: De libero arbitrio 3.20.56,"

Augustinus Magister (Paris 1954) 3.279-286.

La Bonnardiére, A. M. "Evodius, évéque d’Uzale,” in A. Baudrillart
(ed), Dictionnaire d'histoire et de géographie ecclésiastiques 16
(1964) 133-135.

Rowe, W. "Augustine on Foreknowledge and Free Will" Review of
Metaphysics 18 (1964-1965) 356-368.

THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL
BOOK ONE
Chapter 1

1, Evodius. Tell me, please, whether God is not the cause
of evil.t

Augustine. 1 will tell you if you make it clear what kind
of evil you are inquiring about, for we usually speak of evil
in two ways: first, when we say that someone has done evil;
second, when someone has suffered something evil.

Ev. 1 am eager to know about both kinds.

Aug. But if you know or take it on faith that God is good
(and it would be irreligious to think differently), then He
does no evil. Again, if we acknowledge that God is just (and
to deny this would be sacrilegious), then, as He bestows re-
wards upon the good, so does He mete out punishments to
the wicked. To those who suffer them, such punishments are
of course evil. Accordingly, if no one suffers penalties un-
justly (and this we must believe since we believe that the
universe is ruled by Divine Providence) , God is not at all the
Cause of the first kind of evil, though He is of the second.

Ev. Is there not, therefore, some other cause of that evil
which we have found cannot be God?

Aug. There certainly is, for, without a cause, it could not
come to exist. But if you ask me who that cause is, no answer

1 The opening words of the Dialogue are suggestive of a variant title of
the work supported by early manuscripts and by the designation given
by Possidius in his Indiculum, namely, Unde malum et de libero
arbitrio tres libri.

72
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 78

is possible, for it is no one person but rather each evil man
that is the author of his own misdeeds. If you have any doubt
of this, take note of our earlier remark that evil deeds are
punished by God's justice. For unless they were committed
voluntarily, their punishment would not be just.?

2. Ev. I fail to see how anyone can sin who has not learned
to do so. If this is true, I want to know who that someone is
Írom whom we have learned to sin.

Aug. Do you look upon learning as something good?

Ev. Who would dare say that learning is something evil?

Aug. What if it is neither good nor evil?

Ev. I think it is good.

Aug. It certainly is, since, in fact, knowledge is imparted
or awakened in us by learning, and it is only in this way that
something is learned.? Or do you have a different idea?

Ev. 1 think that only good things come to us by learning.

Aug. See to it then that you do not say that evil is learned,
for the word "learning" derives solely from the verb "to
learn."

Ev. If evil things are not learned, then how is it that man
can do them?

Aug. Possibly, evil comes about from the fact that man
turns his back upon learning and estranges himself from it.
But whether this, or something else, is the reason, this much
is certainly clear, that since learning is something good, and
“learning” comes from “to learn,” it is altogether impossible
to learn things evil. For, if evil is learned, it is included in
learning and thus, learning will not be something good. But
learning is, according to your own admission, something
good. Consequently, evil is not something learned, and it is
pointless for you to ask who it is that teaches us wrongdoing.
But if evil is something learned, we learn how to avoid it, not
72 This is the first of many passages found in the Retractations (19.8)

quoted by Pelagius in favor of his teaching on grace. The entire

chapter from the Retractations (1.9) is translated below (pp. 235-241).

3 A passing reference to the theory of "illumination" already suggested
in the Soliloquia and stated for the first time in the De magistro.
74 SAINT AUGUSTINE

how to do it. Hence, to do evil is nothing else than to stray
from the path of learning.

3. Ev. I really think there are two kinds of learning: one,
teaching us to do good; the other, to do evil. But when you
asked whether learning was something good, I replied that it
was, for the love of this very good had taken such hold on
my mind that I was thinking of that kind of learning which
concerns good conduct. But now I realize that there is
another kind of learning which I declare, beyond any shadow
of doubt, to be something evil, and I am looking for its
author.

Aug. Do you at least think that understanding is something
that can only be good?

Ev. So good, in fact, that I fail to see how anything else
in man can be better, and I could not possibly say that any
kind of understanding is evil.

Aug. Suppose the person being taught does not understand.
Can you think of him as having learned?

Ev. Not at all.

Aug. 1f, then, every kind of understanding is good and no
one learns who does not understand, then whoever is learn-
ing is doing good. For everyone who learns, understands, and
everyone who understands is doing good. Consequently, who-
ever is looking for the author through whom we learn some-
thing is really looking for the author of our good actions.
Put an end, therefore, to your wish to find an evil teacher of
some kind or other. For if he is evil, he is not a teacher; if
he is a teacher, he is not evil.

Chapter 2

4. Ev. Now that you force me to admit that we do not learn
how to do evil, go on and tell me the reason why we do
evil.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 75

Aug. You raise a question which sorely perplexed me while
yet a young man, and one which in my weariness drove me
into the company of heretics and resulted in my fall! I was
so injured by this fall, so weighed down by the vast accumula-
tion of nonsensical fables that, had not the love of finding the
truth obtained divine aid for me, I would have been unable
to rise from this fall and to breathe again in the former
atmosphere of free inquiry. And as I took great pains to
extricate myself from this perplexity, so I will follow the same
procedure with you that led to my liberation. For God will
be at hand and will enable us to understand what we have
believed. We know well that we are following the course en-
joined by the Prophet who says: “Unless you believe, you
shall not understand."? We believe that all things in existence
are from the one God, though He is not the author of sin.
But this problem confronts the mind: if sins come from souls
created by God, while these souls in turn come from God,
how is it that sins are not at once chargeable to God?

5. Ev. You have just stated very clearly the problem which
plagued my mind so much and which forcibly drew me into
this inquiry.

Aug. Take courage, and go on believing what you believe,
for there is no better belief even though the reason for it
is hidden from me. To hold God in the highest esteem is
most truly the beginning of all piety. Anyone who does not
believe that God is Almighty or absolutely unchangeable, or
that He is the Creator of all things good, though surpassing
them in excellence, or that He is also a most just Ruler of
all that He has created, or that He had need of no other

1 Although the dualistic solution of the problem of evil figured largely
in his decision to embrace Manichaeism, Augustine acknowledges that
he w^s also influenced by the professed rationalism of the system
and by its claim to a knowledge of the secrets of physical nature. Cf.
De utilitate credendi 2.

2 Isa. 7.9 [LXX]. This Septuagint rendering of the text is of capital
importance for a proper understanding of the spirit of Augustine's
philosophy.
76 SAINT AUGUSTINE

nature in creating, as if He were not sufficient unto Himself—
such a one does not hold God in the highest esteem.

It follows, therefore, that God created all things from
nothing. But Him who is equal to the Father, and whom we
call the Only Son of God, He did not create but begot Him
from His own substance. When we try to represent Him more
clearly, we call Him the Power and Wisdom of God through
whom He made all that He created from nothing.

Having set down these points, let us strive with the help
of God to understand the problem you raise in the following
manner,

Chapter 3

6. Since your question has to do with the cause of our
doing evil, we must first have a discussion on the nature
of evil. State your opinion on this matter, If you cannot ex-
press it fully, all at once and in a few words, let me at least
know what you think by mentioning, in particular, some evil
deeds themselves.

Ev. Adultery, murder, and sacrilege, to say nothing of others
which time and my memory do not allow me to mention.
Can anyone think that these are not evil?

Aug. Tell me first, then, why you think it is wrong to com-
mit adultery? Is it because the law forbids it?

Ev. It is not wrong just because the law forbids it; rather,
the law forbids it because it is wrong.

Aug. What if someone with an exaggerated idea of the de-
lights of adultery should press us further and ask us why we
judge it wrong and reprehensible? Do you think that, for men
who are eager not only to believe but also to understand,
we must fall back on the authority of the law? I am one with
you in this belief, and I do firmly believe and I call upon all
peoples and nations to believe that adultery is wrong. But
right now we are trying to acquire a rational understanding
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 77

and a firm grasp of something that we have accepted on faith.
Think it over, then, as best you can, and tell me the reason
why you think adultery is wrong.

Ev. Y know it is wrong for the very reason that I myself
would be unwilling to tolerate it in my own wife. But anyone
who does to another what he is unwilling to have done to
himself is certainly doing wrong.

Aug. What if a man's lust leads him to offer his wife to
another to have her willingly violated by him, and he, in turn,
desires the same liberty with the other's wife? Do you think
he is doing nothing wrong?

Ev. On the contrary. He is doing great wrong.

Aug. But, according to that rule of yours, such a man com-
mits no sin, for he is doing nothing that he is unwilling to
have done to him. Accordingly, you must find another reason
to show why adultery is wrong.

7. Ev. I think it is wrong for the reason that I have often
seen men condemned for such a crime.

Aug. What of the fact that men have often been condemned
for good deeds? Without sending you to other books, examine
that history which owes its excellence to divine authority. You
will find what a bad opinion we should have of the Apostles
and all the martyrs if we agree that being condemned is a
sure indication of wrongdoing, for they were all judged as
deserving of condemnation for having confessed their faith.
Consequently, if whatever is condemned is evil, then it was
evil at that time to believe in Christ and to confess the faith
itself. On the other hand, if not everything that is condemned
is evil, you must look for another reason for teaching that
adultery is wrong.

Ev. I cannot find any answer to give you.

8. Aug. Perhaps it is passion that is evil in adultery. But as
long as you look for the evil in the outward act itself, which
can be seen, you will run into. difficulties. To give you an
idea how the evil of adultery is passion, let us suppose that
78 SAINT AUGUSTINE

there is no opportunity for intercourse with another man’s
wife, though it is somehow evident that one has the desire
and would do the act if he could. In this case, he is no less
guilty than if he were caught in the act.

Ev. Nothing could be clearer. I see now that there is no
need for a long discussion to convince me of this in the case
of murder and sacrilege, and, in fact, for all kinds of sin. It
is now clear that passion? alone is the ruling factor in every
kind of wrongdoing.

Chapter 4

9. Aug. Do you know too that another name for passion is
desire?

Ev. Ido.

Aug. Do you think there is any difference between this and
fear?

Ev. Indeed. I think there is a great difference between them.

Aug. I believe you think so for the reason that desire seeks
its object, while fear avoids it.

Ev. It is just as you say.

Aug. But suppose someone kills a man, not out of desire
to gain possession of something, but because he fears that some
evil may befall him—will he not be a murderer?

Ev. He will, indeed. Yet his act is not thereby free of the
ruling passion of desire, because whoever kills a man out of
fear, certainly desires to live free of fear.

Aug. Do you think it is a small good to live free of fear?

Ev. It is a great good, but it cannot possibly come to the
murderer through his crime.

Aug. I am not asking you what can come to him but what
71 Libido indicates the disorderly and perverse tendency in man's lower

nature resulting from original sin and inclining him to evil. Against

the Stoics, however, Augustine defends the view that the passions

in se are both good and necessary for man. Cf. De civitate Dei 148-9.

For a clarification of the terms concupiscentia and libido, ct. Bonner,
op. cit. 398-401.

THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 79

it is that he himself desires. Whoever desires a life free of
fear certainly desires a good and, consequently, the desire is
not blameworthy; otherwise we shall be placing blame upon
all who love what is good. Hence we are forced to admit that
there can be murder where we are unable to discover evil
desire as the dominant factor, and it will no longer be true
that the malice in all sins stems from the dominant influence
of passion; otherwise there will be some form of murder that
cannot possibly be sinful.

Ev. Τῇ murder means taking the life of a man, this can
sometimes happen without any sin. When a soldier slays the
enemy, when a judge, or his deputy, executes a criminal,
when, by chance, a deadly weapon leaves someone’s hand un-
intentionally or thoughtlessly, I do not think that these
are guilty of sin in killing a man.

Aug. I agree, but such men are not usually called murderers.
Answer me this question. If a slave kills his master from
whom he was in fear of grave torture, do you think we should
include him among those who take a man’s life in a way that
does not warrant their being called murderers?

Ev. I see a great difference between the two. The first are
acting either according to the law or in a way not opposed to
the law. But there is no law to sanction this man's crime.

10. Aug. You are bringing me back to authority again. But
you must keep in mind tbat we have presently undertaken to
understand what we believe. We take the laws on faith, and
therefore, we must try to understand, if this is at all possible,
whether the law may not be doing wrong in punishing such an
act.

Ev. It is not wrong at all when it punishes a man who know-
ingly and willingly slays his master, which is something that
none of the others did.

Aug. Do you recall having said a while ago that in every
evil deed passion is the dominant factor whereby an act is
made evil?
80 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Ev. Yes, I do.

Aug. Well, did you not also grant that a man who desires
to live free from fear is not harboring an evil desire?

Ev. Y remember that too.

Aug. Therefore, when a master is slain by his servant from
this kind of desire, it is not done by a desire that is blame-
worthy, Consequently, we have not yet found out why this
deed is evil. For we agree that all wrongdoing becomes such
only by passion, namely, by a desire that is blameworthy.

Ev. It now seems to me that this servant was condemned
unjustly. I would not venture this opinion if I could think
of something else to say.

Aug. Have you then convinced yourself that such a serious
crime should go unpunished before you stop to consider
whether that servant desired to be free from fear of his master
in order to gratify his passions? The desire to live free from
fear is characteristic not only of the good but also of evil men,
with this difference, that good men desire it by turning their
love from whatever cannot be possessed without fear of loss,
while evil men, bent upon enjoying such things securely, try
to remove whatever hindrances stand in their way. As a result,
they lead a life of crime and wickedness which should be
called death rather than life.

Ev. I have come to my senses, and am very glad to have a
clear understanding of the nature of that blameworthy desire
called passion. I now see that it is the love of things which
each one can lose against his will.

Chapter 5

11. Let us now inquire, if you will, whether passion is
also the dominant factor in acts of sacrilege which we see
frequently committed out of superstition.!

1 No further mention of this problem occurs in the dialogue.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 81

Aug. Take note whether this question be not premature. I
think we should first inquire whether an on-rushing enemy
or a stealthy assassin may be slain, in the absence of passion,
to defend one’s life or liberty or virtue.

Ev. How am I to judge that these men are free of passion
who take up the sword in defense of things that can be lost
against their will? On the other hand, if they cannot lose
them, what need is there to go to the extreme of killing a man
to defend them?

Aug. Then the law is not just which gives a traveler the
right to kill a robber to avoid being killed himself, or the right
to any man or woman to destroy, if they can, an assailant
about to attack with violence before the injury is inflicted.
Soldiers, too, are commanded by law to kill the enemy, and
if a soldier refrains from doing this, he is punished by the
commander. Can we be rash enough to assert that these laws
are unjust, or rather that they are no laws at all? For an unjust
law, it seems to me, is no law.

12. Ev. I think the law is well protected against any such
accusation since, for those people whom it governs, the law
allows for minor transgressions to prevent the commission of
more serious crimes. It is a far lesser evil that one who plots
another's death should be slain rather than the person who
is protecting his own life. And it is a much greater crime that
a man should be the victim of a violent attack than that the
attacker should be killed by the victim of the attempted attack.
In the slaying of any enemy, the soldier is an agent of the law
and consequently readily discharges his duty apart from any
passion. A law which itself has been enacted for the protec-
tion of the people, cannot be charged with passion. Actually,
if the lawgiver enacts a law, and does so at God's command,
namely, in compliance with eternal justice, he may have done
so completely free of passion. But if he did enact this law
under the influence of passion, it does not follow that com-
pliance with the law must be accompanied by passion, since
82 SAINT AUGUSTINE,

a good law can be enacted by a lawgiver who is not good. If,
for example, a ruler who has seized tyrannical power should
accept a bribe from an interested party to issue a decree
making it unlawful to carry off a woman forcibly, even for
the purpose of marriage, the law is not evil just because it
was made by an unjust and corrupt lawmaker. One can, there-
fore, without passion, obey a law enacted for the protection
of its citizens when it commands that an enemy force be met
by the same kind of force. The same may be said of all public
servants who are subject to the ruling powers according to
the existing law and established order.

But I fail to see how these men mentioned before can be
without blame, though they are blameless in the sight of the
law. For the law does not compel them to kill, but leaves it
within their power. Consequently, they are not at liberty to
kill anyone to defend those things which can be lost against
their will and which, on this account, ought not be loved at
all. As for life, there may be a doubt on the part of some as
to whether it can be taken away from the soul at all when the
body is destroyed. But if it can be taken away, it is worthless;
if not, there is nothing to fear. But as for chastity, who could
doubt that it is rooted in the soul itself, seeing that it is a
virtue? It cannot, therefore, be snatched away by the violence
of an assailant. Whatever the slain attacker was going to
snatch from us is something not entirely within our power
and, consequently, I fail to see how we can call it our own.
Accordingly, I certainly am not blaming the law which per-
mits such assailants to be slain, yet I can find no way to
defend those who kill them.

18. Aug. I can find far less reason for your trying to defend
men who are not guilty in the eyes of the law.

Ev. Perhaps guilty by no law, but only if these are laws
which men can see and read. I am not sure that they are not
bound by some more compelling and entirely unseen law if
we suppose that there is nothing in nature over which Divine
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 83

Providence does not rule. How, in the light of this law, are
they without sin who defile themselves by human slaughter
for the sake of things which ought to be despised? It seems
to me that the law drafted for governing people legally per-
mits such things, while Divine Providence punishes them. A
law enacted for the governing of people is concerned with
upholding whatever is enough to maintain peace among un-
enlightened men so far as this is possible by man-made laws.
But transgressions against the divine law have other appro-
priate penalties from which, as I see it, wisdom alone can
set them free.

Aug. I commend and approve this distinction of yours.
Though it is only a beginning and not fully developed, it
nevertheless gives promise of leading us on to higher things.
You are of the opinion that laws enacted for the government
of cities make many concessions and leave unpunished many
crimes which are nevertheless punished by Divine Providence,
and rightly so. And we should not reproach what a law fails
to accomplish simply because it does not do everything.

Chapter 6

14. Let us examine, if you will, how far evil deeds are
punishable by that kind of law which restrains people in
this present life and then see what remains for the hidden
and inescapable punishment meted out by Divine Providence.

Ev. I am eager to do so, if only we can come to a con-
clusion on so important a matter, for I think the subject is
inexhaustible.

Aug. Rather take courage and, placing your trust in God,
enter upon the path of reason. For there is nothing so obscure
and difficult that cannot, with God’s help, become perfectly
clear and easy. Therefore, with reliance upon God and with
a prayer for His help, let us investigate the question we have
84 SAINT AUGUSTINE

raised. First of all, tell me whether laws promulgated in
written form are a help to men living in the present life.

Ev. Obviously they are, for surely states and nations are
made up of these men.

Aug. What of men themselves, and peoples? Do they belong
to that class of reality where they cannot perish or change, or
are they subject to change and to the conditions of time?

Ev. Could anyone doubt that human nature is obviously
subject to change and time?

Aug. If, therefore, people are found possessed of moderation
and prudence, vigilant for the common good wherein each
one esteems his own private interest of less importance than
the public good, is it not right to enact a law permitting such
people to set up for themselves magistrates to provide for
their welfare, that is, for the public welfare?

Ev. It is absolutely right.

Aug. If, after having gradually grown corrupt, these same
people should afterward prefer the individual to the com-
mon good, should offer their vote for sale and, bribed by
those who covet honor, should entrust the government to
wicked and disreputable men, would it not also be right,
provided some honest man of great ability was found at the
time, to strip these people of the power to elect public offi-
cials and to subject them to the rule of a few good men, or
even to that of one man?

Ev. That would also be right.

Aug. Since these two laws then appear to be contradictory,
insofar as one grants the people the power to elect public
officials while the other takes it away and, since the second
law was enacted in such a way that both cannot be in force
at once in the same city, are we to say that one of them is
unjust and should never have been made?

Ev. Not at all.

Aug. Let us then call that law "temporal" which, though
just, can yet be justly changed in the course of time.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 85

Ev. Let us give it that name.

15. Aug. What of that law called supreme reason, which
must always be obeyed, whereby the wicked merit an unhappy
life and the virtuous a happy life and by which, ultimately,
that law which we called “temporal” can be justly enacted and
justly changed? Can any thinking person fail to see that this
law is changeless and eternal? Could it ever be unjust that
the wicked should be unhappy, while the good are happy;
or that people possessed of moderation and prudence should
elect their own rulers, while a depraved and good for nothing
people should be without such freedom?

Ev. 1 see that this law is eternal and changeless.

Aug. I think that you also see that it is from this eternal
Jaw that men have derived whatever is just and lawful in the
temporal law. For if those people elect officials at one time
and at another time do not, each motivated by justice, this
alteration of the temporal law derives its character of justice
from that eternal law whereby it is always just for respon-
sible people to elect their officials, but not for irresponsible
people, Or do you have a different view?

Ev. Y agree.

Aug. Therefore, let me explain briefly, as well as I can put
it in words, the notion of that eternal law which is impressed
upon our nature:? "It is that law in virtue of which it is just
that all things exist in perfect order." If you think differently,
just say so.

Ev. When you say what is true, there is nothing for me
to contradict.

Aug. Since this law, therefore, is the one law which is the
source for all the variations in those temporal laws for
governing men, is the eternal law itself capable of any
variation?

1 Mainly under the influence of Christian revelation, the Ciceronian
formula is transformed by Augustine to express the notion of divine
exemplarism and that of the eternal law, which it implies.

2 Another passing reference to the Augustinian doctrine of illumination.
86 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Ev. 1 see that this is absolutely impossible, for there is no
force, no chance-occurrence, no natural upheaval that could
ever bring it about that justice would no longer mean the
perfect ordering of all things.

Chapter 7

16. Aug. Come now, and let us see how man himself realizes
perfect order within himself, for a people is made up of men
united under one law, and this, as we said, is the temporal
law. Tell me, now, whether you are absolutely certain that
you are alive.

Ev. Where could I ever have found anything more certain
by way of an answer?

Aug. Can you see the difference between being alive and
knowing that one is alive?

Ev. 1 realize, of course, that no one can know he is living
unless he is alive, but I do not know whether everything
living knows that it is alive.

Aug. I only wish that, as you already believe, so too, you
might come to know that animals are without reason. Then
our discussion might pass on quickly from the present subject.
But since you say you do not know, you are stirring up a
lengthy discussion. The point is not one that can be passed
over while we still go on to our conclusion with the kind of
strict logic that I feel is necessary. Now, then, tell me this.
We often observe how wild beasts are tamed by men, that
is, made subject to man, not only in body but also in spirit,
so they obey man's will by a kind of instinct and habit. Do
you think it could possibly happen that some beast of great
ferocity or physical strength, endowed also with sharp cun-
ning, might try in turn to subdue a man, though many beasts
can destroy his body either by sheer force or by stealth?

Ev. I do not agree that this could possibly happen.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 87

Aug. Very good. Now tell me this too. Since it is obvious
that man is easily surpassed by many brute animals in physi-
cal strength and in other bodily functions, what is it in which
man so excels that no beast can master him, while he can
master many beasts? May it not be that very thing that is
usually called reason or understanding?

Ev. I cannot discover anything else, since that is the one
thing in the soul by which we excel the beast. If animals did
not have souls, I would say that we excel them by the very
fact that we have a soul. But, since they have souls, there
is something wanting in their souls, making them subject to
us, which is found in ours, making us superior to them. And
since, as anyone can see, it is something of no little im-
portance, what better name can we give it than reason?

Aug. Now you see how something which men find very
difficult can become easy, when God comes to our aid. For I
acknowledge that I thought that this question, which I now
see we have concluded, would have detained us for as long
a time as for all the other subjects covered since the start of
our discussion. Keep this point in mind so that our subse-
quent discussion may proceed in a logical fashion. Now I
believe you understand that what we call knowledge is the
same thing as what we perceive by our reason.

Ev. That follows.

Aug. Therefore a man who knows he is living is not with-
out reason.

Ev. That is evident.

Aug. Now beasts have life, although they are without reason,
as was brought out above.

Ev, That is clear.

Aug. See, now you know what you answered you did not
know, namely, that not everything living knows that it is
living, although everything that knows it is living has to be
living.

17. Ev. Y have no further doubt of it. Continue now with
88 SAINT AUGUSTINE

what you have in mind, for I have learned well enough that
it is one thing to live, another, to know that one is living.

Aug. Which of these two, then, is the more excellent in your
opinion?

Ev. What else but the knowledge of life?

Aug. Do you think the knowledge of life is better than life
itself? Or do you feel perhaps that knowledge is a higher and
truer form of life since no one can know who does not under-
stand. What does it mean to understand, if not to live a more
enlightened and perfect life by the very light of the mind?
That, if I am not mistaken, is why you have not preferred
anything else to life, but have placed the better life above
just any form of life at all.

Ev. You have grasped and expounded my own view per-
fectly, provided, however, that knowledge can never be evil.

Aug. I do not think this is possible unless we use the term
“understanding” in a transferred sense, meaning “personal ex-
perience.” Experience is not always something good, as is the
case when we experience punishment. But how can knowledge,
understood in the strict and proper sense, ever be evil, since
we acquire it by reason and intelligence?

Ev. Y see that distinction too. Continue now with the re-
maining points.

Chapter 8

18. Aug. Here is what I am trying to say: Whatever sets
man above the beast, whether we call it “mind” or "spirit"! or,
more correctly both, since we find both terms in the Scriptures,
if this rules over and commands the other parts that make up
man, then man's life is in perfect order. We see how many
things we share in common not only with brute animals but

1 Augustine's terminology for the soul is not strictly fixed. The various
terms employed, such as anima, animus, spiritus, mens, ratio, intelligen-
tia, and intellectus have been elucidated as far as possible by E. Gilson,

The Christian Philosophy of Saint Augustine, trans. L. Lynch (New
York 1960) 269-271.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 89

also with trees and plants, for we observe that bodily nutri-
tion, growth, reproduction, and health are also proper to trees,
which make up the lowest level of life. We also notice, and
admit the fact, that brute animals see and hear and have the
power to perceive corporeal qualities by smell, taste, and touch,
and that frequently their perceptions are keener than ours.
Add to all this, the physical strength and power of their
limbs, the swiftness and agility of their bodily movements. We
excel some animals in all these respects, in others, we are
their equal, while in others, we are even surpassed by some
animals. Certainly, qualities of this kind are possessed by us
in common with brute animals. Actually all animal activity
consists in the pursuit of bodily pleasures and in the avoid-
ance of what is disagreeable.

But there are other things which apparently do not per-
tain to animal life though even in man they are not his
highest endowments, such as the power to jest and laugh.
Anyone with a true discernment of human nature will say
that this is a human quality, though of a lower order. Again,
there is the love of praise and glory, and the lust for power
which, though absent in the beasts, must not make us think
that we are better than beasts because of our desire for such
things. When this desire is not subject to reason, it makes
men unhappy, and no one has ever thought that unhappiness
should make him better than someone else. We are to think
of a man as well-ordered, therefore, when his reason rules
over these movements of the soul, for we must not speak of
right order, or of order at all, when the more perfect is made
subject to the less perfect. Do you not think so?

Ev. That is obvious.

Aug. It follows, therefore, that when reason, or mind, or
spirit, rules over the irrational movements of the soul, then
that is in control in man which ought to be, by virtue of
that law which we found to be eternal.

Ev. I understand and agree with you.
90 SAINT AUGUSTINE,

Chapter 9

19. Aug. Do you think then that a man is wise when his
life is organized and ordered in this way?

Ev. If we do not think that he is wise, I fail to see how
anyone else could be.

Aug. I believe you also realize that most men are unwise.

Ev. That, too, is obvious enough.

Aug. If wise is the opposite of unwise, and we already know
what a wise man is, then you also know who the unwise man
is.

Ev. Anyone can see that he is a man whose mind is not in
perfect control.

Aug. Should we say, then, that such a man has no mind at
all, or rather, that even though it is present, his mind is not
in control?

Ev. It is a case of the latter.

Aug. I would especially like to know what grounds you
have for knowing that there is a mind in men when it fails
to exercise its mastery.

Ev. I wish you would do this yourself, for it is not easy for
me to shoulder this task.

Aug. It should at least be easy for you to recall what we
said a short time ago, namely, that when beasts are tamed
and trained, they serve man's purposes, and that men, in turn,
would be subjected to the same treatment from beasts were
they not superior to them in some way, as we have already
shown. Now it was not in the body that we discovered this
superiority, and when it became clear that it was found in the
soul, we could find no other name for it but reason. Later
on, we remembered that is also called mind and spirit. But
if reason and mind are not the same, it is certain at least
that only the mind can make use of reason. Hence the con-
clusion that whoever has reason cannot be without mind.

Ev. I remember this very well and agree with it.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 91

Aug. Well then, do you think that only men who are wise
can tame animals? I call wise only those men whose life is
controlled by the mind and who are at peace with themselves
by their complete mastery over every unlawful desire.

Ev. It is ridiculous to regard as wise those men who are com-
monly referred to as animal trainers, or even shepherds or
herdsmen or charioteers. We see how all of them have control
over animals that are tame and what pains they take to train
the untamed.

Aug. See, now you have patent proof to make it clear that
mind can be found in a man and still not have the mastery.
It is certainly present in such men, for they act in a way
that would be impossible without having a mind. But the
mind does not have this mastery because they are unwise, and,
as we know very well, this mastery on the part of the mind
is found only in those who are wise.

Ev. Y am amazed that we should have already reached this
conclusion earlier, and that I was still unable to think of an
answer.

Chapter 10

20. But we are now speaking of other matters, for it
has already been shown that wisdom in man consists in this
mastery on the part of his mind and also that it is possible
for the mind to lack such mastery.

Aug. Do you think that the power of passion is greater than
the mind, which we know has been given mastery over the
passions? Personally, I do not think so. For there could be
no perfect order if the weaker should lord it over the stronger.
Consequently, I feel that the power of the mind must be
greater than desire for the very reason that it is only right and
just that it should hold sway over desire.

Ev, I feel the same way, too.

Aug. We can have no hesitation, then, in preferring every
92 SAINT AUGUSTINE

virtue to all vices, so that a virtue is more perfect and sublime
to the extent that it becomes stronger and more invincible?

Ev. Unquestionably.

Aug. It follows that a soul infected with vice cannot over-
come one fortified by virtue.

Ev. Very true.

Aug. I think you will not deny that any kind of soul at all
is better and stronger than any body.

Ev. No one denies this who understands (and it is readily
understandable) that a living substance should be more
highly valued than a non-living substance, or that what im-
parts life should be esteemed more than that which receives
it,

Aug. It is then far less possible for any kind of body at all to
overcome a soul endowed with virtue.

Ev. That is perfectly evident.

Aug. What of a just soul and mind that keeps its natural
right to rule? Could it ever dethrone some other mind pos-
sessed of equal power and virtue, and make it subject to
desire?

Ev. This is impossible, not merely because both souls have
the same degree of excellence but also because, in its attempt
to degrade the other soul, the first will defect from its just
state and become a wicked mind, thereby becoming the
weaker of the two.

21. Aug. You have grasped this point very well. Conse-
quently, you have only to tell me, if you can, whether you
think there is anything more excellent than a mind endowed
with reason and wisdom.

Ev. Nothing, I think, apart from God.

Aug. I think so too. But the question is a difficult one, and
this is not the opportune time to seek a proper understanding
of it. And, though we accept this matter with a firm faith,
a full discussion of this problem must be undertaken by us
with care and diligence.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 93

Chapter 11

For the time being we can be sure that whatever that
nature is which rightfully excels a mind adorned with virtue,
it cannot possibly be unjust. Consequently, though it were
within its power to do so, not even this nature will force
the mind to become a slave to passion.

Ev. Anyone could see that right away.

Aug. Whatever, therefore, is the equal of mind, or superior
to it, will not make it a slave to lust because of its own
justice, provided the mind is in control and is strong in vir-
tue. On the other hand, anything inferior to the mind can-
not do so because of its own weakness, as we have learned
from what we already agreed upon. We are faced with the
conclusion, then, that nothing else can make the mind the
companion of evil desire except its own will and free choice.

Ev. Nothing, I see, could be more logical.

22. Aug. It follows that you feel it is only just that such
a mind should suffer punishment for so great a sin.

Ev. I cannot deny it.

Aug. Well, then, are we to take lightly a punishment en-
tailing such consequences as these, where passion lords it
over the mind, dragging it about, poor and needy, in different
directions, stripped of its wealth of virtue, now mistaking the
false for the true, even defending something vigorously at
one time only to reject at another what it had previously
demonstrated, while all the while it rushes headlong into
other false judgments; now withholding all assent, while fear-
ful for the most part of the clearest demonstrations; now in
despair of the whole business of finding the truth while it
clings tenaciously to the darkness of its folly; now at pains
to see the light and understand, and again falling back out
of weariness to the darkness? And all the while, the cruel
tyranny of evil desire holds sway, disrupting the entire soul
and life of man by various and conflicting surges of passion;
94 SAINT AUGUSTINE

here by fear, there by desire; here by anxiety, there by empty
and spurious delights; here by torment over the loss of a loved
object, there by a burning desire to acquire something not
possessed; here by pain for an injury received, there by the
urge to revenge an injury. On every possible side, the mind
is shriveled up by greed, wasted away by sensuality, a slave to
ambition, is inflated by pride, tortured by envy, deadened by
sloth, kept in turmoil by obstinacy, and distressed by its
condition of subjection. And so with other countless impulses
that surround and plague the rule of passion. How could we
ever think that this is not a punishment when, as you see,
it is something that all have to suffer who do not hold fast
to wisdom?

23. Ev. I do indeed consider this a heavy penalty and one
that is absolutely just, if a man, who once occupied the sum-
mit of wisdom, should choose to descend therefrom and be-
come the slave of passion. But it is doubtful whether anyone
could be found who has either made such a choice, or who
would make it now. We believe that man was so perfectly
created by God and established in happiness that it was only
by his own will that he fell from this state into the miseries
of this mortal life. Nevertheless, while I accept this firmly on
faith, I have as yet not grasped it by my understanding. If you
think we should put off a careful inquiry into this matter for
the present, you do so against my will.

Chapter 12

24, But the problem that troubles me most is why we
suffer these very severe penalties when, to be sure, we are not
wise and have never been wise before, or why it would be
right to say that we suffer them because we abandoned the
heights of virtue and chose to be enslaved by passion. If you
can clear up this point by discussion, I would not agree at
all that you should postpone the question.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 95

Aug. You speak as if you knew for sure that we have never
been wise, for you have in mind the period of time beginning
with our birth into this life. But wisdom resides in the soul,
and whether the soul lived another kind of life before its
union with the body and one time lived a life of wisdom is
a great question, a great mystery, which will have to be ex-
amined in its proper place.! But there is no reason why this
should keep us from elucidating as far as possible the subject
at hand,

25, 1 am asking you whether we have a will.

Ev. I do not know.

Aug. Do you want to know?

Ev. Even that I do not know.

Aug. Then do not ask me any more questions.

Ev. Why?

Aug. Because I do not have to answer your questions unless
you want to know what you are asking. Furthermore, if you
have no desire to attain wisdom, there should be no discussion
with you about such matters. Finally, you can be no friend
of mine unless you wish me well. Furthermore, look into
yourself and see whether you do not will a happy life for
yourself.

Ev. I acknowledge there can be no denying that we have a
will. Go on now, and let us see what you are going to con-
clude from this.

Aug. I shall, but tell me first whether you think you also
have a good will.

Ev. What is a good will?

Aug. It is a will by which we seek to live a good and up-
right life and to attain unto perfect wisdom. See now whether
you are not seeking after a good and upright life and whether
you do not have a strong desire to be wise, or whether, in any
case, you can dare deny that we have a good will when we
choose these things.

1 In Book Three, Augustine reviews for the first time the four views
proposed to explain the origin of the soul (20.5658; 21.59).
96 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Ev. I do not deny any of this, and I agree, therefore, not
only that I have a will but also that it is now a good will.

Aug. Please tell me what value you set on this will. Do you
think that riches or honors or bodily pleasures, or all three
together, can be compared in any way with the will?

Ev. God forbid such wicked folly!

Aug. Should we not then rejoice a little that we have
something in the soul—I am referring to this good will itself
—in comparison with which all the things we mentioned are
worthless, though we see how men in great numbers spare
no effort or risk to acquire them?

Ev. Rejoice we should, indeed, and very much so.

Aug. Do you think that those who fail to experience this
joy suffer only a small loss when they are deprived of so
great a good?

Ev. On the contrary, they suffer a very great loss.

26. Aug. I believe you see then that it lies within our will
either to enjoy or to lack so great and true a good as this.”
For what is more within the power of the will than the will
itself? When anyone has a good will, he really possesses some-
thing which ought to be esteemed far above all earthly king-
doms and all the delights of the body. On the other hand,
if he does not have a good will, he is truly deprived of. some-
thing which the will alone can of itself bestow upon him and
which is more excellent than all those goods which lie beyond
our control. Accordingly, when he thinks himself most un-
happy if he loses his fine name, vast wealth, and various kinds
of bodily goods, will you not rather think him most un-
happy for clinging to goods he can lose so easily and which
he cannot have when he wants them, even though he possesses
all these things in abundance? For he lacks a good will which
should not even be compared with these, and though it is so
great a good, one has only to will it in order to possess it.

Ev. Very true.

2 Also adduced by Pelagius against Augustine's teaching on the necessity
of grace. Cf. Retract. 1.9.3.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 97

Aug. It is, therefore, only right and just that foolish men
should suffer such misery, even though there was never a time
when they were wise—and this is an uncertain and baffling
question.

Ev. Lagree.

Chapter 13

27. Aug. Now consider whether you think that prudence is
the knowledge of things that we should desire and avoid.

Ev. I think it is.

Aug. What of fortitude? Is it not that disposition of soul
whereby we despise all misfortune and the loss of things that
are not within our control?

Ev. I think so.

Aug. And is not temperance also that disposition which re-
strains and checks our desire for those things which it is
shameful for us to desire? Or do you disagree?

Ev. On the contrary, you are saying just what I think.

Aug. And how shall we define justice except to say that it
is a virtue whereby each one is given what is his own?

Ev. My own idea of justice is no different.

Aug. 'The man of good will (and we have been discussing
its excellence at length) will consequently embrace this alone
with a love that knows nothing better. Let him find his delight
therein and make it the object of his joy and delight, while
he examines and appraises its value, aware that it cannot be
snatched from him or stolen against his will. Can we doubt
that this man will be opposed to everything that is hostile
to this one good?

Ev. He would simply have to be opposed.

Aug. Do we think that he is devoid of all prudence if he
sees that he should seek this good and avoid whatever is
opposed to it?

Ev. I do not think that anyone could possibly do this with-
out prudence.
98 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Aug. Right. But do we not also ascribe fortitude to this
man? He cannot really love or esteem highly all the things
that lie outside our control, for these are loved by a perverse
will which he must oppose as inimical to his most cherished
good. But since he has no love for them, he does not grieve
over their loss but is rather disdainful of them, and this,
as we have already seen and agreed, is the task of fortitude.

Ev. Let us certainly ascribe fortitude to him. I do not see
how I could possibly apply this term more properly than to a
man who bears with calm equanimity the absence of those
goods which we are unable either to acquire or retain by the
sheer powers of our nature. And we have seen how the man
with fortitude must do this very thing.

Aug. Now see whether we may deprive him of temperance,
since this is the virtue which keeps our passions in check. And
what is so harmful to a good will as passion? Consequently,
you will readily understand why a man who values his good
will resists the passions in every way possible and is at war
with them, and therefore has a right to be called a temperate
man.

Ev. Go ahead. I am in agreement.

Aug. There remains the virtue of justice which, as I see it,
cannot possibly be wanting in such a man. For a man who
has a good will and values it, resisting, as we said, whatever is
contrary to it, cannot bear ill-will towards anyone. It fol-
lows that he will not injure anyone, which is only possible
when a man gives to each one his due. I believe you recall
that you were in agreement when I stated that this was the
function of justice.

Ev. 1 do indeed, and I acknowledge that in a man who
esteems highly his own good will and loves it, all those four
virtues are found which you defined a short time ago to my
satisfaction.

28. Aug. What, then, can keep us from acknowledging that
the life of this man is praiseworthy?
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 99

Ev. Nothing at all. In fact, everything inclines, and even
compels us to do so.

Aug. Well, then, can you possibly think that an unhappy
life should not be avoided?

Ev. Y am very much of the same opinion, and believe that
there is nothing else for us to do but to avoid it.

Aug. But you certainly do not think that a praiseworthy life
should be avoided.

Ev. Y think that it should rather be sought after earnestly.

Aug. A praiseworthy life, therefore, is not an unhappy life.

Ev. That follows, of course.

Aug. You have no further difficulty, as far as I can see, in
agreeing with this conclusion, namely, that the life that is
not unhappy is the happy life.

Ev. That is obvious.

Aug. Then we agree that the happy man is one who values
his own good will, in comparison with which he despises
whatever else may be called good, which can be lost even
when the will to retain it remains.

Ev. Why should we not agree to a conclusion that follows
logically from points already agreed upon?

Aug. You have a good grasp of the matter. But tell me now,
if you will, whether having a love for one’s good will and a
high esteem of it, as we said, is itself a good will?

Ev. What you say is true.

Aug. But if we rightly judge this man to be happy, shall
we not also be right in judging as unhappy a man whose
will is of a contrary nature?

Ev. Absolutely right.

Aug. How are we justified then in regarding as doubtful
the fact that it is by the will that we merit and live a good
and praiseworthy life, and, by the same will, a life that is
shameful and unhappy,! even though formerly we were never
wise?

1 Cited by Pelagius in support of his teaching on free will. Cf. Retract.
193.
100 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Ev. I admit that we arrived at this conclusion by arguments
that are certain and undeniable.

29. Aug. Consider this point too. I think you will recall
how we defined a good will, where I believe we said it was that

_ by which we seek to live a good and upright life.

Ev. 'That is my recollection.

Aug. If, then, it is by a good will that we love and embrace
this good will, preferring it to all those things that we are
unable to retain by our sheer volition, then it follows, as
our reasoning has shown, that those four virtues reside in the
soul and that possessing them is the same as living a good and
upright life. Accordingly, any man with the will to lead a
good and upright life, provided he prefers this will to all
fleeting goods, will acquire so great a possession with such
great ease that to have what he wills is the same thing as to
will it.?

Ev. Honestly, I can hardly restrain myself from shouting for
joy at the sudden appearance of a good at once so great and
so easy to acquire.

Aug. When this very joy deriving from the possession of this
good uplifts the soul peacefully, quietly, and steadfastly, it is
called the happy life. Or do you think that living the happy
life is something other than finding delight in goods that are
true and certain?

Ev. I feel as you do.

Chapter 14

30. Aug. That is right. But do you not think that every
man wills and desires the happy life in every way possible?

Ev. Undoubtedly.

Aug. Then why do they not all attain it? We had agreed
in our discussion that men merit a happy life by their will

2 Also employed by Pelagius to defend man's moral sufficiency. Ibid.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 101

and an unhappy life also by their will, so that they deserve
what they get. But now a kind of contradiction suddenly
appears, which, unless we examine it carefully, threatens to
upset our previous careful and clear line of reasoning. How,
for example, can anyone endure an unhappy life because of
his own will when there is no one at all who wills to live
unhappily? Or how does man by his will attain the happy
life when there are so many unhappy, and yet they all will
to be happy?

Does it come about because it is one thing to will what is
good or bad, but another to merit something in virtue of a
good or bad will? For those who are happy—and they must
also be good—are not happy simply because they willed to
live the happy life, for bad men do this too, but because
they wished to live upright lives, which bad men are un-
willing to do. It is little wonder, therefore, that unhappy men
do not attain what they want, namely, the happy life, for they
do not also will what must be its companion, and without
which no one can deserve to attain it, namely, an upright life.
Certainly, the eternal law, which it is now time to consider
again, has unalterably decreed that merit is in the will,
whereas reward and punishment are identified with happiness
and unhappiness. Hence, when we say that men are unhappy
by their own choice, we are not saying they want to be un-
happy but that their will is such that unhappiness results of
necessity and even against their will. Hence this does not go
counter to our earlier conclusion that all men want to be
happy, though not all succeed because they do not all have
the will to lead an upright life, and it is this will which alone
can merit the happy life. Do you have any objections to
raise here?

Ev. No, I have none.

1 Another passage adduced by Pelagius to show that man can merit
eternal happiness by his own unaided will. Cf. Retract. 1.9.3.
102 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 15

31. But let us see now how all this is related to the
question we raised about the two kinds of law.

Aug. Just as you say. But first tell me whether the man who
loves an upright life and takes such delight in it that it be-
comes for him not only something righteous but also a
pleasure and a joy—tell me whether he loves and cherishes
this law when he sees that it bestows a happy life upon a
good will, and an unhappy life upon a bad will.

Ev. He loves it with a strong and perfect love, for it is in
following it that he lives as he does.

Aug. In loving this law then, is he loving something change-
able and temporal, or something fixed and lasting?

Ev. Something everlasting of course, and changeless.

Aug. And what of those who persist in their evil will and yet
desire to be happy? Is it possible for them to love that law
whereby unhappiness is their first recompense?

Ev. Not at all, it seems to me.

Aug. Is there anything else that they love?

Ev. Yes, there are many, namely, those things which their
persistent bad will prompts them to acquire or to retain.

Aug. I take it that you are speaking of wealth, honors,
bodily delights, and beauty, and all the rest that they cannot
acquire when they want them and which they can lose against
their will.

Ev. Those are the very things.

Aug. Can you think that these are everlasting when you
see how subject they are to the vicissitudes of time?

Ev. Only a fool could think so.

Aug. Obviously, then, there are men who love things
eternal, and others who love things temporal, and we have
already agreed that there are two laws, one eternal and the
other temporal. Now if you have any idea of justice, which
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 103

of these men, in your opinion, should be subject to the eternal
law, and which to the temporal law?

Ev. Y think the answer to your question is easy. I think that
men whose happiness derives from their love of things eternal
come under the eternal Jaw, whereas the temporal law is laid
upon the unhappy.

Aug. Your judgment is correct provided you hold fast to
the conclusion which our reasoning proved so clearly, namely,
that those subject to the temporal law cannot be immune
from the eternal law. For we have already determined that
it is the source of whatever is just and of whatever may
undergo just alteration, You apparently understand well
enough that men who adhere to the eternal law by a good
will have no need of the temporal law.

Ev. I see what you mean.

82. Aug. So the eternal law commands us to turn our love
from temporal things and to direct it, once purified, to things
eternal.

Ev. Yes, it does.

Aug. Next, what would you say is commanded by the
temporal law? Only this, that men inordinately attached to
those goods which we can call our own for a time, should
possess them by virtue of that very right which preserves
peace and human society, so far as is possible in such affairs.
These temporal goods include, first of all, the body and what
are called goods of the body, such as sound body, keenness of
sense, strength, beauty, and any others there may happen to
be. Some are necessary for the useful arts and must therefore
be valued more highly; others are of less value. Next comes
freedom, which is not true freedom except for those who are
happy and who adhere to the eternal law. But I am presently
speaking of that freedom which makes men think they are
free when they have no masters, or which is desired by those
who want to be set free from any human masters. Then come
parents, brothers, wife, children, kindred, relatives, friends,
104 SAINT AUGUSTINE

and those who are joined to us by ties of intimacy. Then there
is the state itself which is commonly regarded as holding the
place of a parent. Also, honors and praise, and what is called
popular favor. Last of all, there is money, a single term in-
cluding all things of which we are the rightful owners, and
which we seem to have the power to dispose of by sale or
donation.

To explain just how the temporal law assigns each man
his share of these things would be a difficult and lengthy
matter, and one that is clearly unnecessary for the question
at hand. It suffices to understand how, in the meting out of
punishment, the power of the law does not go beyond depriv-
ing those punished of these goods, or of a portion of them.
Consequently, it imposes restraint through fear and accom-
plishes its purpose by constantly harassing the souls of un-
happy men for whose government it has been designed. As
long as they fear to lose these goods, they practice a kind of
moderation in their use capable of holding together a society
that can be formed from men of this stamp. The law does not
punish the sin committed by loving these things, but the
crime of taking them from others unjustly.

See, therefore, whether we have now reached the end of a
discussion which you thought was interminable, for we had
undertaken to inquire how far the temporal law governing
peoples and states of this world can go in inflicting punish-
ment.

Ev. I see we have finished this question.

33. Aug. Then do you also see that if men did not love
those things which can be taken away against their will, there
would be no question of any punishment, either in the form
of an injustice done them or by way of a just penalty in-
flicted upon them?

Ev. I see that too.

Aug. Accordingly, with respect to the same things, one man
makes good use of them, another, bad use. The man who
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 105

makes bad use of them is captivated by his love for them
and is entangled by them. In other words, he becomes sub-
ject to things which should be subject to him, making these
goods his goal when, really, his true good should consist in
assigning them their proper place and use. On the other
hand, the man who uses them rightly shows that these
things are really good but that they are not his true good; for
they do not make him a good or better man, rather, they
become so because of him. Consequently, he is not held fast
by their love and does not make them, so to speak, members
of his own soul (which would result from loving them), lest,
when they come to be amputated, they afflict the soul with
excruciating pain and corruption. He rises completely above
these things, ever ready, as the occasion requires, to possess
and control them, and even more ready to lose them and be
without them.

In view of all this, do you think it is right to blame silver
and gold because of greedy men, or food and wine: because
of gluttons and drunkards, or the feminine form because of
fornicators and adulterers, and so on, particularly, when you
see the physician puts fire to a good use while the poisoner
uses bread for his wicked purposes?

Ev. It is perfectly true that we should not blame the things
themselves but men who put them to a bad use.

Chapter 16

34. Aug. Very well. I believe we have now begun to see the
force of the eternal law and have discovered just how far
the temporal law may go in meting out punishment. We have
also made a clear enough distinction between two classes of
things, eternal and temporal, and again between two classes
of men, those who pursue and love things eternal, and those
who pursue and love temporal things. But we also agreed
106 SAINT AUGUSTINE

that what each man chooses to pursue and embrace is within
the power of the will to determine, and that it is only the
will that can dethrone the mind from its citadel and despoil
it of its right order.’ It is also clear that when someone puts
a thing to bad use, we are not to blame the thing itself but
the one who makes bad use of it. Let us go back, if you will,
to the question proposed at the start of this discussion and
see whether it has been solved. We had set out to inquire
about the nature of wrongdoing and our entire discussion has
been directed to this end.

We may now, then, turn our attention to this question and
inquire whether wrongdoing is anything else than the pursuit
of temporal things to the neglect of things eternal, namely,
the pursuit of things, as if they were great and wonderful,
which are perceived by the lowest part of man, his body, and
which we can never be sure of, and the neglect of those things
which the mind enjoys and perceives of itself, and which
cannot be lost to the man who loves them. For every kind
of wrongdoing, namely, sin, is included, it seems to me, under
this one class. But I am waiting to find out what you think.

35. Ev. It is just as you say, and I agree that all sins fall
under this one class and occur when a man turns away from
what is divine and truly abiding and turns to what is chang-
ing and uncertain. And though these latter have been as-
signed their rightful place and achieve a kind of beauty all
their own, nevertheless, it is the mark of a wicked and per-
verse soul to become a slave to the pursuit of those things
which should rather be regulated according to the good
pleasure of the soul whose right to rule derives from divine
order and law. I think we have at the same time found a solu-
tion to the problem of why we do evil, which we proposed
to examine after the question on the nature of wrongdoing.
For, unless I am mistaken, we do evil from the free choice
of the will, as was shown by the argument already advanced.

1 Quoted by Pelagius in favor of man's moral autonomy.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 107

But now I am asking whether He who created us should have
given us that very freedom of choice by which it has been
shown that we have the power to sin. For, without this
power, we apparently would not have been capable of sinning,
and there is thus reason to fear that God will be adjudged
the cause even of our evil deeds.

Aug. Have no fear of this. But we will have to find another
time to examine this matter more carefully since the discus-
sion at hand needs to be kept within limits and brought to
an end. I would have you believe that we have, so to speak,
knocked at the door of great and abstruse questions that
warrant our inquiry. When we have begun, with God’s help,
to penetrate their inner recesses, you will certainly recognize
what a difference there is between our present discussion and
those that are to follow, and how these latter excel, not only
in the mental discernment required for their inquiry, but also
in the lofty character and resplendent light of their truth.
Only let us be religiously motivated so that God in His Provi-
dence may allow us to hold fast to the end the course we have
embarked upon.

Ev. 1 accede to your will, and willingly concur with your
judgment and wishes.
BOOK TWO
Chapter 1

1. Ev. Now explain to me, if that is possible, why God gave
man free choice of the will since, if he had not received it,
man would certainly be unable to sin.

Aug. Do you know for sure that God has given man some-
thing which you think should not have been given him?

Ev. From what I seem to gather from the previous book,
we do have free choice of the will and this alone enables us
to sin,

Aug. I also recall that this point was made clear. But I
have asked you just now whether you know that it was God
who gave us that very thing which we obviously possess and
which enables us to sin.

Ev. I think it is none other, for it is from Him that we
have our being and from Him that we merit reward or
punishment, according as we live good or sinful lives.

Aug. I am also eager to know whether you see this clearly
or whether you are willing to believe it on authority, even
though you do not understand it.

Ev. Y assure you that I first accepted this on authority; yet
what could be truer than that everything good comes from
God, that everything just is good, and that it is just that
there should be punishment for sinners and rewards for the
righteous? Hence the conclusion that God makes sinners un-
happy and the righteous happy.

2. Aug. I agree, but I would raise this other question as to
how you know that we have our being from God. For you

108
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 109

did not now explain this, but only that it is from Him that
we merit either punishment or reward.

Ev. I see that the only evidence for this point stems from
our earlier conclusion that God punishes sins, since, in fact,
all justice comes from Him. For while it is a mark of goodness
to bestow benefits upon strangers, it is not in keeping with
justice to inflict punishments upon them. Clearly, therefore,
we belong to God, not only because He is most generous to
us with His gifts, but also because He is most just in meting
out punishment. Again, from the fact that every good comes
from God, and here you agreed with my contention, we can
understand that man too comes from God. For man himself,
insofar as he is man, is something good because he can live
an upright life whenever he so wishes.!

3. Aug. Obviously, if this is so, the question you raised is
already answered. If, indeed, man is something good and can-
not do what is right unless he wills to, then he must have
free will, without which he cannot do what is right. For
we must not suppose that because a man can also sin by his
free will that God gave it to him for this purpose. The fact
that man cannot lead an upright life without it is sufficient
reason why God should have given it. That it was given for
this purpose can be seen from this, that when he has used it
to commit sin, he is subject to divine punishment, which
would be unjust if free will had been given him not only to
live uprightly but also to commit sin. How could punishment
be justly visited upon a man who used his will for the very
purpose for which it was given him? But when God punishes
a sinner, what does He seem to say but: "Why did you not
use your free will for the purpose for which I gave it to you,
namely, to do what is right?" Besides, if man were without
free choice of the will, what would become of the good called
justice whereby sins are punished and good deeds are honored?
For, unless something is done by the will, it can be neither a

I The first of two sentences from this Book quoted by Pelagius for his
teaching on free will. Cf. Retract. 1.9.8.
110 SAINT AUGUSTINE

sin nor a good deed. Consequently, punishments and rewards
would be unjust if man did not possess free will. Moreover,
there must be a place for justice both in punishments and re-
wards because it is one of those goods that come from God.
It follows, therefore, that God should have given man free
will.

Chapter 2

4. Ev. I admit now that God gave it. But let me ask you
this: if it was given to do good, do you not think it should
have been impossible to turn it to a sinful purpose? As with
justice itself, which is given man to lead a good life, how
could anyone lead a bad life by reason of his being just? So,
too, if the will were given to do good, no one would be able
to sin by his will.

Aug. 1 hope God will enable me to answer your question,
or better, that He will enable you to answer it yourself,
when you are enlightened by that truth within you, which is
the greatest teacher of all.t I wish you would tell me shortly—
provided you know for sure that God gave us free will, which
was what I asked you—whether we should say that something
should not have been given when we acknowledge that it was
God who gave it. For, if it is not certain that He gave it, it is
right for us to ask whether it was a good gift, so that if we
find that it was, we will also have found that it was given by
Him who has given all good things to man, Now if we find

1 A summary of conclusions already reached in the De magistro on the
doctrine of illumination and its logical counterpart of the teacher's
role in learning. Though inspired by both Neoplatonic and biblical
sources, Augustines doctrine possesses an originality that cannot be
reduced to any of the classical epistemologies of Greek philosophy. For
ἃ summary of the theory and its interpretation, including that of the
author himself, cf. Gilson, The Christian Philosophy of St. Augustine
77-96. Several new interpretations have been more recently advanced.
CE. J. Morán, La teoría del conocimiento en san Agustin (Valladolid
1961); C. E. Schuetzinger, German Controversy on Saint Augustine's
Illumination Theory (New York: Pageant Press 1960).

THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL Il

that it was not a good gift, we will realize that God did not
give it, since it is blasphemous to charge Him with wrong-
doing. But if it is certain that He Himself gave it, then, no
matter how it was given, we must acknowledge that there is
no reason why it either should not have been given or been
given differently than it was given. For He gave it, who may
never be rightly blamed for what He has done.

5. Ev. While I accept all this with a firm faith, yet, since
I have no intellectual grasp of it, let us so conduct our in-
quiry as if it were all uncertain. As I see it, our uncertainty
as to whether free will was given us to do good, since we can
also sin by it, gives rise to the further uncertainty as to
whether it should have been given at all. If it is uncertain
that free will was given to do good, it is also uncertain
whether it should have been given, and, consequently, also
uncertain that God gave it to us. For, if it is uncertain whether
it should have been given, it is uncertain that it was given by
God since it would be impious to suppose that He has given
anything which he should not have given.

Aug. You are certain, at least, that God exists.

Ev. 'This too I hold firmly, not from direct knowledge, but
by faith.

Aug. Suppose, then, that one of these fools of whom it is
related in the Scripture, “the fool has said in his heart, there
is no God"? should say this to you, and should be unwilling
to go along with what you believe, but want to know whether
what you believe is true. Would you abandon this man or
would you think that he should somehow be convinced of
what is a matter of firm belief for you, especially if he was
not stubborn in his opposition but was eager in his desire to
know?

Ev. What you just said clearly suggests how I should answer
him. Even though he were utterly unreasonable, he would at
least admit that no one should enter into a discussion on any

2 Ps. 13.1.
112 SAINT AUGUSTINE

subject at all with a man who is insincere and obstinate, and,
most of all, on a subject of such importance. Once this was
admitted, he would first prevail upon me to believe that he is
making this inquiry in good faith and that as far as the
present problem is concerned, he harbors no hidden guile or
obstinacy. I would then point out (and I think this would be
a simple matter for anyone) that since he wishes another to
believe the hidden thoughts of his own mind, thoughts known
to him but unknown to the one who believes them, it is much
more reasonable for him to believe in God's existence on the
authority of the books of those great men who have left a
written record testifying that they lived with the Son of God.
They have also recorded certain things they witnessed which
could not possibly have happened if there were no God. And
it would be very foolish of him to reproach me for believing
these men since he wished me to believe him. Now certainly
he could find no good reason for not wanting to imitate what
he is unable to reproach.

Aug. Now if you think it is enough to accept God's exist-
ence on the word of such great men without being rash, then
what of those other questions which we undertook to explore,
as if they were uncertain and completely unknown? Why,
I ask, do you do not likewise think that we should also be-
lieve these things on the authority of these men to the extent
that we need expend no further effort in investigating them?

Ev. But we are eager to know and understand what we
believe.

6. Aug. Your memory serves you well, and there is no deny-
ing that this was the position we took at the opening of our
earlier discussion. For, unless believing and understanding
were different, and unless we were first to believe those im-
portant and heavenly truths which we are eager to under-
stand, there would be no point in the prophet's saying: “Un-

3 Cf. 124.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 118

less you believe, you shall not understand." Our Lord, too,
both by word and deed, exhorted those whom He called to be
saved that they should first believe. Later, when He referred
to the gift He would bestow upon those who believed, He
did not say, “This is eternal life that they may believe,” but,
“This is eternal life that they may know Thee, the one true
God, and Him whom Thou hast sent, Jesus Christ."5 Then,
to those who already believed, He said: "Seek and you shall
find.”® Now we cannot say that we have "found" something
which is believed but not known, nor can anyone become fit
to find God unless he has first believed what he will after-
wards come to understand. Let us, therefore, in obedience to
the Lord’s command, carry on our inquiry earnestly. For what
we are seeking at His behest, that we shall find upon His
manifesting it to us Himself, so far as these things can be
found in this life and by men like ourselves. We must believe
that they are perceived and grasped more clearly and per-
fectly by more virtuous men, even while they dwell on this
earth, and certainly by all good and religious men after their
present life. We must make this our hope too, and, despising
all that is worldly and human, we must desire and love the
higher things in every way possible.

Chapter 3

7. Let us pursue our inquiry, if you will, according to
this order: first, what evidence is there that God exists;! next,

4 Isa. 7.9. In the De doctrina christiana (1.2.17), Augustine mentions the
alternative reading suggested by the Hebrew text but interprets it
according to the sense of the Septuagint version

5 John 173.

6 Matt. 7.7.

1 The beginning of Augustine's rational dialectic to prove God's ex-
istence from the existence and nature of truth. Nowhere else in his
writings is the problem dealt with ex professo or in such detail. The
connection between the problem of certitude and God's existence, as
here evidenced, strongly supports Gilson’s observation ^. . . that in
114 SAINT AUGUSTINE

do all things, insofar as they are good, come from God; lastly,
should free will be numbered among things good. Once these
questions have been answered, I think it will become clear
enough whether it was right to give free will to man.

Hence, to begin with what is most evident, I will ask you
whether you yourself exist. Possibly, you are afraid of being
mistaken by this kind of a question when, actually, you could
not be mistaken at all if you did not exist??

Ev. Go on instead to the other questions.

Aug. Then, since it is evident that you exist, and that this
could not be so unless you were living, then the fact that you
are living is also evident, Do you understand that these two
points are absolutely true?

Ev. I understand that perfectly well.

Aug. Then this third point is also evident, namely, that
you understand.

Ev. It is evident.

Aug. Which of these three, in your opinion, is the most
excellent?

Ev. Understanding.

Aug. Why do you think so?

Ev. Because, while these are three in number, existence,
life, and understanding, and though the stone exists and the
animal lives, yet I do not think that the stone lives or that
the animal understands, whereas it is absolutely certain that
whoever understands also exists and is living. That is why I
have no hesitation in concluding that the one which contains

Saint Augustine the problem of God's existence cannot be distin
guished from the problem of knowledge; knowing how we apprehend
truth and knowing the existence of Truth are one and the same
thing" (The Christian Philosophy of Saint Augustine 18).

Although suggested as early as the Cassiciacum period in De beata
vita (21) and the Soliloquia (2.1.1), this is the first formal statement
of Augustine’s own argument against the Skeptics based on the im-
mediate evidence of personal existence. Similar formulations appear
later in De vera religione (39.73), De Trinitate (15.1221), and De
civitate Dei (11.26). For a comparison with the "cogito" of Descartes,
cf. G. Lewis, "Augustinisme et Cartésianisme," Augustinus Magister
(Paris 1954) 2.1087-1104.

n
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 115

all three is more excellent than that which is lacking in one
or both of these. Now whatever is living is certainly also
existing, but it does not follow that it also understands. This
kind of life, I think, is proper to animals. But it certainly
does not follow that what exists must also live and under-
stand, for 1 can admit that a corpse exists, but no one would
say it lives. And still less can something understand if it is
not living.

Aug. We maintain, then, that two of these three are lacking
in a corpse, one in the animal, and none in man.

Ev. That is true.

Aug. We likewise maintain that the most excellent among
the three is what man possesses together with the other two,
namely, understanding, and that having this, he must also
exist and live.

Ev. We do, indeed.

8. Aug. Now tell me whether you know you have these
well known senses of the body, sight, hearing, smell, taste, and
touch.

Ev.1do.

Aug. What do you think is the function of sight, that is,
what do we perceive when we see?

Ev. Anything corporeal.

Aug. When we see, we do not likewise perceive what is hard
and soft, do we?

Ev. No.

Aug. What then is the proper function of the eyes, that is,
what do we perceive with them?

Ev. Color.

Aug. Of the ears?

Ev. Sound.

Aug. Of smell?

Ev. Odors.

Aug. Of taste?

Ev. Flavor.
116 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Aug. Of touch?

Ev. Soft or hard, smooth or rough, and many such qualities.

Aug. And what of the shapes of bodies? Do we not perceive
that they are large, small, square, round, and so on, both by
touch and sight? Consequently, these qualities are not proper
either to sight or vision alone, but belong to both.

Ev. T understand.

Aug. 'Then you further understand that each sense has its
own proper object to report while some senses have certain
objects in common.

Ev. Y understand that also.

Aug. Can we, therefore, determine by any of these senses
what is the proper object of each sense or what those objects
are which some or all of them have in common?

Ev. Not at all. This is discerned by some power within.

Aug. Might not this be the reason itself, which is wanting
in beasts? For, in my opinion, reason enables us to grasp these
and to know just what they are.

Ev. I think it is rather reason that enables us to know that
there is a kind of internal sense to which everything is re-
ferred by those well-known five senses. Now the power en-
abling the animal to see is one thing, that by which it shuns
or seeks what it perceives by seeing is something else. The
former is located in the eye, the latter within, in the soul
itself. The inner sense enables the animal to seek and acquire
things that delight and to repel and avoid things that are
obnoxious, not only those that are perceived by sight and
hearing, but all those which are grasped by the other bodily
senses. But this power cannot be called either sight or hearing
or smell or taste or touch, but is some other kind of power
that presides over all of them together. Although, as I men-
tioned, we do grasp this power by our reason, yet we may
not call it reason, since it is obviously present in beasts.

9. Aug. I acknowledge that this power, whatever it is, does
exist, and I do not hesitate to call it the inner sense. But
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 117

unless the impressions brought to us by the bodily senses pass
beyond even this inner sense, they cannot result in knowledge.
For it is by reason that we grasp whatever we know. To men-
tion but a few instances, we know that color cannot be per-
ceived by hearing nor sound by sight. And this is something
that we do not know by sight or hearing or by that inner
sense which is not lacking in beasts. We are not to suppose
that beasts know that light is not perceived by the ear or
sound by the eye, since we discern this only by rational re-
flection and thought.

Ev. I could not say that I have grasped this point. Suppose
that beasts do discern that color cannot be perceived by
hearing or sound by sight by means of that inner sense which
you admit they do possess.

Aug. You do not suppose, do you, that animals can dis-
tinguish one from another the color they perceive, the power
of sense in the eye, the inner sense within the soul, and reason
by which all these are enumerated and defined, one by one?

Ev. Not at all.

Aug. But could reason distinguish these four things one
from another and assign their limits by definition unless color
was referred to it by the sense of sight, and this sense, in turn,
by that inner sense which presides over it, and this inner
sense, in turn, by its direct action upon reason, provided,
however, that there is no other power interposed?

Ev. I fail to see how it could be otherwise.

Aug. Are you aware of this, that color is perceived by the
sense of sight, whereas this sense of sight is not perceived by
sight itself? For you do not see the act of seeing itself by the
same sense by which you see color.

Ev. Absolutely not.

Aug. Try now to make these further distinctions. You will
not deny, I think, that color and seeing color are different,
and also that the power is different by which color can be per-
ceived in its absence as if it were present.
118 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Ev. 1 draw a distinction between these two, and admit that
they are distinct from one another.

Aug. Except for color, you do not see any of these three
with the eyes, do you?

Ev. Nothing else but color.

Aug. Tell me then what it is that enables you to see the
other two, for you could not distinguish them if they were
not seen.

Ev. 1 do not know the nature of that other power. I know
it exists but nothing more.

Aug. 'Then you do not know whether it is reason itself or
that vital power, called the inner sense, which presides over
the bodily senses, or something else?

Ev. I do not know.

Aug. But this much you do know, that reason alone can
define these powers and that it can only do so with what is
presented for its scrutiny.

Ev. That is certain.

Aug. It follows that this other power, whatever it is, which
enables us to perceive all that we know, is the servant of
reason. It presents and reports to reason whatever has come
within its reach so that the objects of sense perception can
be assigned their proper limits and be grasped not only by
sensation but also by knowledge.

Ev. 'That is right.

Aug. Reason itself distinguishes between its servants and
the impressions they convey to it, and likewise recognizes what
a difference there is between these and itself and asserts its
primacy over them. Now does reason know reason in any
other way than by reason itself? Or how would you otherwise
know that you had reason unless you perceived it by reason?

Ev. That is very true.

Aug. Consequently, in perceiving color, we do not perceive
by the same sense our act of seeing; in hearing we do not hear
our act of hearing; in smelling a rose, the act itself of smelling
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 119

imparts no fragrance to us; in tasting a flavor, the act itself
has no taste in our mouth, and in touching something, we
cannot touch the act itself of touching. It is evident that
those five senses cannot be perceived by any one of them,
though all corporeal qualities can be perceived by them.

Ev. It is evident.

Chapter 4

10. Aug. I think it is likewise clear that the inner sense
perceives not only what it receives from the five bodily senses
but also the senses themselves. For if the beast were not aware
of its act of perception, it could not otherwise direct its move-
ments toward something, or away from it. This awareness is
not ordered towards knowledge, which is the function of
reason, but towards movement which it does not perceive by
any of the five senses.

1f this is still obscure, it may become clear if you note the
single example of what occurs in any one of the senses, such
as sight. The beast could not open its eyes at all or turn its
gaze towards the thing it wants to see were it not for the fact
that while its eyes were closed or not fixed upon the object,
it perceived that it was not seeing. But if it is conscious of its
not seeing when in fact it does not see, it must also be aware
of its seeing when it does see. The fact that, while seeing,
the beast does not alter its gaze by that desire which moves
it to turn its gaze when it does not see something, shows that
it is aware of both states.

But whether this vital power, which is aware of its per-
ceiving corporeal things, also perceives itself, is not so clear,
except for the fact that when a person raises the question in
his own mind, he comes to see that all living things shun
death. Since death is the contrary of life, we must infer that
the vital power is aware of itself since it shuns what is con-
120 SAINT AUGUSTINE

trary to it. But if this point is still not clear, then disregard
it, so that our effort to reach the desired conclusion will be
based solely on clear and evident proofs.

These points are clear: corporeal qualities are perceived by
the bodily senses; one and the same sense cannot perceive
itself; the inner sense perceives that corporeal qualities are
perceived by the bodily sense and also the bodily sense itself;
all these things of sense, as well as reason itself, are known by
reason and come under the heading of knowledge. Do you not
think so?

Ev. I do indeed.

Aug. Come, tel! me how this question arose, for we have
been pursuing this avenue of inquiry a long time in our de-
sire to reach a solution.

Chapter 5

11. Ev. So far as I recall, we are now dealing with the first
of those three questions which we proposed a while ago when
we arranged a plan for this discussion, namely, how the ex-
istence of God can be made evident, though we must believe
it with a strong and persevering faith.

Aug. You have recalled this very well. But I want you also
to keep carefully in mind that when I asked whether you were
existing, it was made clear that you knew not only this but
also two other things.

Ev. I remember that too.

Aug. Now see which one of these three you think is that
one to which pertains everything perceived by the bodily
senses, that is, in what class of things you think we should
locate whatever is perceived by our senses, by the eyes or by
any other organ of the body. Should it be with things that
merely exist, with those that also live, or with those that also
understand?
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 121

Ev. With those that merely exist.

Aug. In which of the three classes do you think the sense
power itself should be placed?

Ev. In the class of things living.

Aug. Which of these two do you think is better, the sense
itself or its object?

Ev. The sense, of course.

Aug. Why is that?

Ev. Because whatever also has life is better than something
which merely exists.

12. Aug. And what of that inner sense which we found was
inferior to reason and which we still share in common with
beasts? Would you hesitate to rank this sense above that by
which we perceive a body, which you said should be ranked
above the body itself?

Ev. Y would have no hesitation whatever.

Aug. I should like you to tell me why you have no hesitation
on this point. For you cannot say that this inner sense should
be placed in that one of the three classes which also includes
understanding, but rather in the class of things which exist
and live, although they lack understanding. This inner sense
is found also in beasts which are without understanding. If
this is so, I would like to know why you rank the inner
sense above that which perceives corporeal qualities, since
both are found in the class of things that live. You ranked the
sense which perceives bodies above bodies because the latter
are in the class of things which only exist, while the former
are in the class of things that also live. Since the inner sense
is also found in this class, tell me why you think it is better.

If you say it is because the inner sense perceives the bodily
sense, I do not believe you will find any rule that we could
rely upon for holding that the subject perceiving is better
than what it perceives. Otherwise, we might also be forced
to conclude that the person understanding is better than
what he understands. This, of course, is untrue because man
122 SAINT AUGUSTINE

understands wisdom but he is not better than wisdom itself.
Consider, then, why you thought that the inner sense should
be ranked above the sense by which we perceive things
corporeal.

Ev. It is because I look upon the inner sense as a ruler and
kind of judge of the latter. For if there is any shortcoming
in the discharge of their function, the inner sense demands
this service from the bodily senses as a kind of debt owed by
its servant, as was pointed out a short time ago. The sense
of sight does not see that it is seeing or not seeing and, failing
to do so, it cannot judge what is missing or what is sufficient.
This is done by the inner sense which directs the soul of the
beast to open its eyes when they are closed and to supply what
it perceives is missing. There can be no doubt in anyone's
mind that what judges is better than what is judged.

Aug. Do you understand then that even the bodily senses
pass a kind of judgment on bodies? Pleasure and pain are
theirs to experience whenever they come in contact gently or
roughly with a body. Just as the inner sense judges as to
what is missing or what is sufficient in visual perception, so
the eyes themselves judge as to what is deficient or sufficient
in the matter of color. So too in the case of hearing, just as
the inner sense judges whether or not it is attentive enough,
so the auditory sense judges concerning sounds, discerning
those which either flow gently into the ear or which produce
a harsh dissonance,

There is no need to continue with the rest of the bodily
senses. I think you know already what I am trying to say,
namely, that just as the inner sense judges the bodily senses,
approving what is complete in them and requiring what is
deficient, so too the bodily senses themselves judge bodies,
admitting pleasurable sensations of touch found in them,
while rejecting the opposite.

Ev. I see these points clearly and agree that they are per-
fectly true.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 123

Chapter 6

13. Aug. See now whether reason also judges the inner
sense. I am not asking whether you have any doubt that
reason is better than the inner sense because I am sure that
this is your judgment. Yet I feel that now we should not
even have to ask whether reason passes judgment on the inner
sense. For in the case of things inferior to it, namely, bodies,
the bodily senses, and the inner sense, is it not, after all,
reason itself that tells us how one is better than the other
and how far superior reason itself is to all of them? This
would not be possible at all unless reason were to judge them.

Ev. Obviously.

Aug. Consequently, that nature which not only exists but
also lives, though it does not understand, such as the soul of
beasts, is superior to one that merely exists and neither lives
nor understands, such as the inanimate body. Again, that
nature which at once exists and lives and understands, such
as the rational mind in man, is superior to the animal nature.
Do you think that anything can be found in us, namely, some-
thing among those elements which complete our nature and
make us men, that is more excellent than that very thing
which we made the third in those three classes of things? It is
clear that we have a body and a kind of living principle
which quickens the body itself and makes it grow, and we
recognize that these two are also found in beasts. And it is
also clear that there is a third something, the apex, so to
speak, or eye of the soul, or whatever more appropriate term
may be employed to designate reason and understanding,
which the animal nature does not possess. So I ask you to con-
sider whether there is anything in man’s nature more excellent
than reason.

Ev. I see nothing at all that is better.
124 SAINT AUGUSTINE

14, Aug. But suppose we could find something which you
are certain not only exists but is also superior to our reason,
would you hesitate to call this reality, whatever it is, God?

Ev. If I were able to find something which is better than
what is best in my nature, I would not immediately call it
God. I do not like to call something God because my reason
is inferior to it, but rather to call that reality God which has
nothing superior to it.

Aug. That is perfectly true. For God Himself has given this
reason of yours the power to think of Him with such reverence
and truth, But I will ask you this: if you should find that
there is nothing above our reason but an eternal and change-
less reality, would you hesitate to say that this is God? You
notice how bodies are subject to change, and it is clear that
the living principle animating the body is not free from
change but passes through various states. And reason itself
is clearly shown to be changeable, seeing that at one time it
endeavors to reach the truth, and at another time it does not,
sometimes it arrives at the truth, sometimes it does not. If
reason sees something eternal and changeless not by any bodily
organ, neither by touch nor taste nor smell nor hearing nor
sight, nor by any sense inferior to it, but sees this of itself,
and sees at the same time its own inferiority, it will have to
acknowledge that this being is its God.

Ev. 1 will openly acknowledge that to be God, if, as all
agree, there is nothing higher existing.

Aug. Good! It will be enough for me to show that some-
thing of this kind exists. Either you will admit that this is
God or, if there is something higher, you will admit that it
is God. Accordingly, whether there exists something higher
or not, it will become clear that God exists, when, with His
assistance, I shall prove, as I promised, that there exists
something above reason.

Ev. Prove then what you are promising.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 125

Chapter 7

15. Aug. I shall do so. But first I shall ask you whether
my bodily senses are the same as yours, or whether mine are
mine alone and yours are yours alone. If this latter were not
so, I would be unable to see anything with my eyes which
you would not see.

Ev. I fully agree that though the senses are of the same
nature, yet each one of us has his own sense of sight or
hearing, and so forth. One man cannot only see but also hear
something that another man does not hear, and one man can
perceive by any one of the senses something different from
what another perceives. So it is obvious that your senses are
yours alone and mine are mine alone.

Aug. Would you give the same or a different answer con-
cerning the inner sense?

Ev. Not a different answer, certainly. My inner sense per-
ceives my bodily sensations and your inner sense perceives
yours. I am often asked by a man who sees something whether
I also see it, simply because I am conscious of seeing or not
seeing it, while he is not.

Aug. What of reason itself? Does not
his own since, actually, it can happen that I understand somc-
thing while you do not, and you may be unable to know
whether I do understand, although I do know.

Ev. It is also clear that each one of us has his own rational
mind.

16. Aug. You could not possibly say, could you, that we
possess individually our own sun or moon, or morning star,
or other such things that we see, though each one of us sees
these things with his own sense?

Ev. I could never say such a thing.

Aug. So it is possible for many of us to see some one thing
at one and the same time, though each of us has his own
individual senses with which he perceives the same thing

h one of us have

126 SAINT AUGUSTINE

which we all see at the same time. Consequently, though my
senses are distinct from yours, it may happen that what we
see is not something different for both, but the one thing
which is present to each of us and which is seen by both of us
at the same time.

Ev. That is perfectly clear.

Aug. We can also hear the same voice at the same time so
that, while my hearing is distinct from yours, yet it is not a
different voice that we are hearing at the same time. Neither
is one part of the voice heard by me and another part by you,
but whatever sound is made is within the hearing of both of
us, perceived as one sound in its entirety.

Ev. That too is clear.

17. Aug. With regard to the other senses, you must now
take note that what we have to say in this connection holds
for them in a way neither entirely the same nor entirely
different from what was said about the two senses of sight and
hearing. You and I can inhale the same air and perceive the
quality of the air by its odor. Again, we can both taste the
same honey, or any other kind of food and drink, and per-
ceive its quality from the taste. Although the taste is the
same, yet our senses are individual to us, yours belong to
you, and mine to me. So when both perceive the one odor or
taste, you do not perceive it with my sense nor do I perceive
it with yours. Neither do I perceive it by a single sense which
we can share in common, but my sense is mine entirely and
so is yours, though it is the one odor or taste that is perceived
by both of us.

Accordingly, these two senses of smell and taste are found
to have something similar to the two senses of sight and
hearing. But they differ in a way which has a bearing on the
subject we are presently considering. For, though we both
inhale the same air with our nostrils or taste the same food
that we take, I do not breathe in that part of the air which
you do, or eat the same portion of food that you eat, but I

THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 127

take one part, and you, another. Therefore, when I breathe,
I inhale as much of all the air as I need, and you do the
same. And though the same food is all eaten by both of us,
yet it cannot be taken wholly by both of us in the way that
we both hear a whole word at the same time and both see
the same sight equally well. But in the case of food and drink,
different portions have to pass into each of us. Do you have
some faint understanding of all this?

Ev. On the contrary, I agree that it is perfectly clear and
certain.

18, Aug. You would not say, would you, that we should
compare the sense of touch with those of sight and hearing
with reference to the point now under discussion? We can
both perceive by the sense of touch not only the same body,
but also the same part of the body. It is different with food,
for each one of us cannot take all the food placed before us
when we are both eating it. But you and I can touch the
same body in its entirety, not just different parts of it, but
the whole body.

Ev, I admit that in this respect the sense of touch is very
much like the two previous senses. But I see it differs in this,
that both of us can see and hear all of the same thing
together, that is, at the same time. Now both of us can touch
a whole body at one time, but only in different parts, and
only the same part at different times. I cannot apply my
sense of touch to the part you are touching unless you remove
yours.

19. Aug. A very astute answer! But you should note this
point too, that though some objects perceived by us are per-
ceived together and others separately, yet each of us has an
individual awareness of his own sense perceptions of the ob-
jects he perceives through the bodily sense. I am neither aware
of your sensations nor are you aware of mine. In other words,
with regard to things corporeal what we can perceive in-
dividually but not together is that alone which so becomes
128 SAINT AUGUSTINE

part of us that we can change and transform it into ourselves.
So it is with food and drink where both of us cannot taste the
same portion, Although nurses actually serve food already
masticated to infants, yet the portion which is taken to be
tasted and is assimilated into the body of the nurse chewing
it cannot be returned and given back as food for the infant.
When the palate tastes something pleasant, no matter how
small a portion it is, it claims this for itself once and for all,
and makes it become part of the body's nature. If this were
not the case, no taste could remain in the mouth after
masticated food was rejected from the mouth. We may say
the same of the parts of the air we breathe. Though you can
inhale some of the air which I exhale, you cannot do so
with that part which has become nourishment for me because
it cannot be returned. Physicians point out that we take in
nourishment even with our nostrils. When I breathe, I am
the only one who can perceive this nourishment and I can-
not return it by exhaling it for you to inhale it again and
perceive it with your nostrils.

Although we perceive other sense objects, our perception
of them does not destroy their nature and change them into
our bodily substance. We can both perceive them either
together or at different times, so that what I perceive, either
in whole or in part, can also be perceived by you. Light,
sound, and bodily objects are examples of things with which
we can come in contact, but without altering their nature.

Ev. I understand.

Aug. It is clear, therefore, that those things which are not
changed by us, though we perceive them with our bodily
senses, are not the property of our senses and hence are all the
more common to us, seeing that they are not changed or
converted into our own individual or, so to speak, private
property.

Ev. lam in full agreement.

Aug. We are to understand by individual and, so to speak,
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 129

private property, that which is identified with each one of
us and which each one alone can perceive within himself as
belonging properly to his own nature. By common and, so to
speak, public, we understand that which is experienced by
all who perceive something, without any deterioration or
change in the thing itself.

Ev. That is correct.

Chapter 8

20. Aug. Come now, and let me have your attention. Tell
me whether anything can be found which all thinking men
perceive in common, each one making use of his own mind
and reason. Something which is seen is present to everybody
and is not changed into something else useful for those to
whom it is present, like food and drink, but remains whole
and entire, whether it is seen or not. Or do you think that
perhaps no such thing exists?

Ev. On the contrary, I see there are many, but it is suffi-
cient to single out one of them, the nature and truth of
number which are present to all who make use of reason.
Everyone engaged in computing them strives to grasp their
nature with his own reason and intelligence. Some do this
rather easily, others with more difficulty, while others cannot
do it at all, though the truth makes itself equally available to
all who can grasp it. And whenever someone experiences
this, it is not altered or changed into a kind of nourishment
for the one who perceives it. When anyone errs in judgment
about it, the reality itself, which remains true and intact, is
not at fault; rather, his own error is measured by his failure
to behold the reality itself.

21. Aug. That is certainly true. I see you were quick to
find an answer as becomes a man not unfamiliar with such
matters. But suppose I were to tell you that these numbers
have not been impressed upon our mind by any nature of
130 SAINT AUGUSTINE

their own but come from things which we grasp with the
bodily senses and are a kind of sense-image of things visible,
how would you reply? Or would you also be of the same
opinion?

Ev. I could never think of such a thing. Even if I could
perceive numbers by the bodily senses, I could not on this
account also perceive the nature of numerical division and
addition by the bodily sense. It is by the light of the mind
that I show a man to be wrong whose computation indicates
an incorrect total either in addition or subtraction. Besides,
I cannot tell how long anything will endure which comes in
contact with my bodily senses, such as the heavens and the
earth, and all the other bodies which I see are contained in
them. But seven and three are ten, not only now, but forever.
And there has never been, nor will there ever be a time when
seven and three were not ten. This is why I have said that
the indestructible truth of number is common to me and to
anyone at all who uses his reason.

22. Aug. I cannot gainsay the absolute truth and certainty
of your answer. But you will readily see that even the numbers
themselves have not been brought in through the bodily
senses if you realize that all numbers are designated as multi-
ples of the number one. For example, twice one is two, one
tripled is three, and ten times one is ten, No matter what
the number, it is so designated according to the number of
times it contains the number one. But anyone with a true
notion of “one” will doubtless discover that it cannot be
perceived by the bodily senses. Whatever comes in contact
with the bodily senses can be shown to be many, and not one,
since, being a body, it also has numberless parts. To say
nothing of the minute and barely discernible particles, no
matter how small the tiny body, it has one part on the right,
another on the left, one above and another below, one to the
far side and another on the near side, parts at the extremes
and parts in between. We have to admit that such parts are
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 131

found in any body, no matter how small it is. Accordingly, we
acknowledge that no bodily reality is one, truly and simply,
and yet it would be impossible to enumerate so many parts
within the body unless these were differentiated by the
concept of one.

Whenever I look for this “one” in a body, though I am sure
1 will not find it, I certainly know what I am looking for
and what it is that I do not find there. I know it cannot be
found, or better, that it is not present there at all. Con-
sequently, when I recognize that a bodily reality is not one, I
know the meaning of one; otherwise, I could not number the
many parts in the body. Wherever it is that I come to know
one, I certainly do not know it by the bodily senses, for by
these I know only bodies, which, as we have shown, are not
one, truly and simply. Furthermore, if we have not perceived
one by the bodily sense, then neither have we perceived any
number by them, none at least of those numbers which we
can discern with the understanding. For there is not one of
them that does not get its name from its being a given multi-
ple of one, which is not perceived by the bodily senses. The
half of any small body has itself its own half, although the
whole body is made up of two halves. Hence those two parts
of the body are such that even they are not simply two. But
the number we call two, because it is twice that which is
simply one, has one for its half, namely, that which is simply
one, and this in turn cannot have a half or a third, or any
other fraction, because it lacks parts and is truly one.

23. Since we are following numerical order, we see next
that two follows one and that it is related to one as its
double. The double of two does not follow at once, but
three, and then four, which is the double of two. And this
ordered sequence extends to all the remaining numbers ac-
cording to a fixed and changeless law. Thus, after one, the
first of all numbers, the first number, apart from one, which
follows next is two, the double of one. After this second
132 SAINT AUGUSTINE

number, namely, two, the second number, apart from the
number two, is the double of two, since the first number after
two is three, while the second after two is four, the double of
two. After the third number, apart from three, is the double
of three, since after three, the first number is four, the second
is five, and the third is six, which is the double of three. So
too, after number four, the fourth number, apart from four,
is the double of four, since following the fourth number,
namely, after four, the first number is five, the second is six,
the third is seven, and the fourth is eight, which is the
double of four. You will also find that the same thing holds
for all the other numbers, which we discovered when we
combined the first two, that is, numbers one and two, namely,
that the double of any number is as many times removed from
that number as the number doubled is removed from the
beginning of number.

How, then, do we discern that this numerical relationship,
which we observe to prevail throughout the whole range of
numbers, is changeless, fixed, and indestructible? No one per-
ceives all numbers by any bodily sense, for they are innumer-
able. I say, then, how do we know that this holds true for
all numbers? What idea or image enables us to see with
such assurance that this fixed law governing number holds
throughout innumerable instances, unless it be that inner
light of which the senses have no knowledge?

24, Men endowed with the God-given ability to reason
and not blinded by stubbornness, are constrained by these and
many other such proofs to acknowledge that the law and truth
of numbers do not pertain to the bodily sense, that they re-
main changeless and incorruptible, and belong to all who
use their reason to perceive them, Many other things possibly
come to mind which, as the common and, as it were, public
possession of all who use reason, are there to be seen by the
mind and reason of each one who perceives them, though the
realities themselves remain intact and unchanging. However,
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 133

I was delighted to hear that the law and truth of numbers
came especially to your mind when you wanted to give an
answer to my question. It is not without some intent that
number and wisdom are brought together in the Sacred
Scriptures, where it is said: “I have gone round—I and my
heart—to know and to consider, and to search out wisdom
and number,”

Chapter 9

25. But let me ask you this: What, in your opinion,
should be our view of wisdom itself? Do you think that each
man has his own individual wisdom, or that there is one
wisdom present to all alike, and that a man becomes wiser
the more he shares in it?

Ev. 1 do not yet know to what wisdom you refer, for I
notice that wise actions and words are looked at differently
by men. Those who wage war think they are acting wisely,
while those who spurn war to devote care and effort to tilling
the soil, prefer to extol this activity and to regard it as
wisdom. Those shrewd enough to devise schemes for acquir-
ing money are wise in their own eyes. Those uninterested
in such things and who renounce them and all such temporal
goods, to direct all their effort to the search for truth so as
to know themselves and God, judge that this is the one great
task of wisdom. Those who are unwilling to allow themselves
such leisure for the quest and contemplation of truth, pre-
ferring to work for the welfare of men amidst burdensome
cares and duties and are occupied with the task of providing
just rule and government for human affairs, think that they
are wise. And those who combine both of these, living part
of their life in the contemplation of truth and part in the
discharge of official duties, which they feel are owing to
human society, think they have won the prize for wisdom. I

1 Eccles. 7.26.
134 SAINT AUGUSTINE

make no mention of the countless sects where each one sets
its own followers above the rest and would have it that they
alone are wise.

Consequently, since the answer to our present problem
must not be what we believe but what we grasp with a clear
understanding, I cannot possibly reply to your question
about the nature of wisdom unless I know by reflection and
rational discernment what I already hold on faith.

26. Aug. Do you think there can be any wisdom but the
truth wherein the highest good is seen and possessed? Now
those men whom you mentioned as pursuing different goals,
all seek good and shun evil, but they pursue different goals
because they have different ideas about the good. Any man,
then, who seeks what should not be sought is still in error,
even though he would not be seeking it unless he thought it
was good. A man who seeks nothing, or who seeks what
ought to be sought, is not in error.

Insofar, therefore, as all men seek the happy life, they are
not in error. But to the extent that a man fails to hold to
that way of life which leads to happiness, by so much is he
in error, though he avows and professes that he is seeking only
happiness. For there is error whenever we follow something
which does not lead us where we want to go. And the more
one errs in his way of life, the less wise he is, for he is all
the farther from the truth wherein the highest good is seen
and possessed. It is by attaining to the possession of the
highest good that a man becomes happy, which is unquestion-
ably what all of us desire.

Just as we agree that we want to be happy, so do we agree
that we want to be wise since, without wisdom, no one is
happy. For no one is happy except by the highest good which
is found in the contemplation and possession of that truth
which we call wisdom. So, just as the notion of happiness is
impressed on our minds even before we are happy—this
enables us to have the assurance and to state unhesitatingly
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 185

that we want to be happy—so too, even before we are wise,
we have the notion of wisdom impressed on our minds. And
if any one of us is asked whether he wants to be happy, it is
this notion that enables him to reply that he does, beyond
any shadow of doubt.

27. We agree then about the nature of wisdom, though
you were not able to put it in words. For if you did not per-
ceive it at all in your mind, you simply could not know that
you want to be wise or that this was your duty, which I do
not think you will deny. If, then, we are in agreement about
wisdom, I want you to tell me whether, as in the case of the
law and truth of numbers, you think that wisdom too is
present to all alike who use their reason, or whether you feel
there are as many wisdoms as there are men capable of be-
coming wise. For there are as many minds as there are men,
so that we do not perceive anything with one another's mind.

Ev. If the highest good is one for all men, then that truth
wherein we can contemplate and possess it, namely, wisdom,
must also be common to all.

Aug. Do you doubt that the highest good, whatever it is,
is the same for all men?

Ev. Y really do, because I notice that different men take
delight in different things as their highest good.

Aug. I only wish that no one had any doubt about the
highest good, just as no one doubts that it is only by the
possession of this good, whatever it is, that man can become
happy. But as this is an important question and may require
a lengthy discussion, let us go all the way and suppose that
there are just as many highest goods as there are different
classes of things which different men seek as their highest
good. It does not follow, does it, that wisdom itself is not
something one and common to all alike, simply because those
goods which they see and choose in the light of this wisdom
are many and varied? If you think it does, you could also
doubt that the sunlight is something one, since the objects
136 SAINT AUGUSTINE

we see in it are many and varied. From among these objects
each one freely chooses something to enjoy through his sense
of sight. One man likes to look at a mountain height and
finds delight in such a view; another, at the level expanse of
a meadow; another, at the slope of a valley; another, at the
green forest; another, at the undulating surface of the sea;
another gathers in all or several of these at once for the
sheer delight of looking at them.

The things which men see in the light of the sun and
which they choose for their enjoyment are many and varied,
yet there is the one sunlight in which each viewer sees and
takes hold of an object for his enjoyment. Similarly, the goods
are many and varied from which each one chooses what he
wants, and it is by contemplating and taking hold of this
object of his choice that each one really and truly makes this
the highest good wherein to find his enjoyment. It is still
possible that the light of wisdom itself,-in which these things
are seen and grasped, may be one and shared by all alike who
are wise.

Ev. I acknowledge that this is possible and that there is
nothing to prevent the one wisdom from being common to
all, even though the highest goods are many and varied. But I
would like to know whether this is the case, since, by granting
that it is possible, it does not necessarily follow that it is so.

Aug. We know for now that wisdom does exist. But whether
there is one wisdom common to all, or whether each wise
man has his own wisdom in the way that he has his own soul
or mind, is something that we do not yet comprehend.

Ev. That is true.

Chapter 10

28, Aug. Well then, where do we see the truth of what we
now know, namely, that wisdom or wise men exist, and that
all men want to be happy? I certainly have no doubt what-
ever that you do see this and that it is true. Do you see then
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 137

that this is true just as you see your own thoughts which are
completely unknown to me unless you disclose them to me?
Or do you see it in such a way as to understand that it can
also be seen as true by me, though you did not tell it to me?

Ev. I have no doubt indeed that you could also see it,
even against my will.

Aug. Is not this one truth, then, which we both see with our
individual minds, common to both of us.

Ev. Quite evidently.

Aug. 1 also believe you will not deny that we should have
a zeal for wisdom and will agree that this in fact is true,

Ev. I do not deny this at all.

Aug. Can we possibly deny that this truth is likewise one
and that it is something to be seen by all alike who know
it? Yet each one sees it with his own mind, not with mine
or yours, or with anyone else's mind, since what is seen is
present to all alike who behold it.

Ev. We could never deny that.

Aug. Will you not also admit that these statements have an
absolute truth which is present and common to you as well
as to me, and to all who see it, namely: we ought to live
justly, the less perfect should be subordinated to the more
perfect, like things should be equally esteemed, each one
should be given his due?

Ev. I agree.

Aug. Can you deny that something incorrupt is better than
the corrupt, the eternal better than the temporal, the in-
violable better than what is subject to injury?

Ev. Who could possibly deny it?

Aug. Can anyone say, therefore, that this truth belongs to
him alone when its changeless character is there to be seen
by all who have the power to behold it?

Ev. No one could truly say that this truth belongs to him
alone, since it is just as much one and common to all as it
istrue.
138 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Aug. Who, again, is there to deny that the soul should
turn from what is corrupt to the incorrupt, and should love,
not the corrupt, but the incorrupt? Or how can anyone, once
he acknowledges that something is true, fail to understand its
changeless character or to see that it is present to all alike
who are able to behold it?

Ev. That is perfectly true.

Aug. Well then, will anyone doubt that a life which does
not turn away from its firm and moral convictions by any
adversity is better than one which is easily broken and over-
come by temporal misfortune?

Ev. Who could doubt it?

29. Aug. I will look for no further examples of this kind.
It is enough that together we see and admit as an absolute
certainty that those truths are so many rules and beacons
of virtue, that they are true and changeless, and, whether
taken singly or collectively, that they are present in common
for all to see who can do so, each one viewing them with his
own mind and reason. But what I am really asking is whether
you think that these truths pertain to wisdom, I believe that
in your opinion a man is wise who has acquired wisdom.

Ev. I certainly think so.

Aug. Could a man who lives justly live this way unless he
knew which are the lower things that he subordinates to the
higher, which the things of equal rank that he brings together,
and what things he assigns as appropriate to each class?

Ev. He could not.

Aug. 'Then you will not deny, will you, that a man who
sees these things does so wisely?

Ev. I do not deny it.

Aug. Does not the man who lives prudently choose the in-
corrupt and judge that it should be preferred to the corrupt?

Ev. Quite clearly.

Aug. Then when a man chooses to turn his soul to what
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 139

everybody admits should be chosen, can we deny that he
is making a wise choice?

Ev. I could never deny that.

Aug. Therefore, when he turns his soul to what was a wise
choice, he does so wisely.

Ev. Most certainly.

Aug. And the man who is undeterred by fear or punishment
from what he has wisely chosen, and to which it was wise
of him to turn, is undoubtedly acting wisely.

Ev. Beyond any doubt.

Aug. It is perfectly clear then that all those truths which
we call rules and beacons pertain to wisdom. The more a
man uses them in the conduct of his life and lives in con-
formity with them, the more wisely does he live and act. And
we cannot really say that what is done wisely is found apart
from wisdom.

Ev. 'That is absolutely true.

Aug. Accordingly, just as there are true and changeless
rules governing numbers whose law and truth are, as you
said, unalterably present and common to all who see them,
so, too, are the rules of wisdom likewise true and changeless.
When you were asked just now about a few of them, one by
one, you replied that they were true and evident and admitted
that they are common for all to see who are capable of
beholding them.

Chapter 11

30. Ev. I cannot doubt it. But I would very much like to
know whether these two, namely, wisdom and number, fall
under some one class since you mentioned that they are
placed together even in the Sacred Scriptures. Is one derived
from the other, or is it contained in the other; does number,
for example, derive from wisdom, or is it contained in
wisdom? For I would not dare assert that wisdom derives from
140 SAINT AUGUSTINE

number or is contained in it. I do not see how I could do
so because I am acquainted with many mathematicians or
accountants, or whatever else they may be called, who work
out perfectly accurate and remarkable calculations. But of
wise men, I either know very few, or possibly none at all.
Wisdom, it strikes me, is far nobler than number.

Aug. You mention a subject at which I am also wont to
marvel. For whenever I go over in my mind the unchanging
truth of number, and consider, so to speak, its abode or
sanctuary or sphere, or however else we may suitably indicate
somehow the seat and dwelling-place of number, I am far
removed from the body.! And when I chance to find some-
thing that I can think of, but not something that I can
adequately express in words, I return wearily to the familiar
things about us in order to be able to speak, and I speak in
the usual way of things that confront our gaze. This happens
to me even when I do all I can to think carefully and intently
about wisdom. That is why I marvel exceedingly at the fact
that, while wisdom and number occupy a hidden and certain
abode in Truth, and while there is also the additional scrip-
tural testimony which I cited, linking them together—I
marvel exceedingly, as I said, why number is of little value
for most men, while wisdom is dear to them.

But it doubtless comes down to this, that they are one and
the same thing. Yet, since the Sacred Scripture has this to
say of wisdom that "it reaches from end to end strongly and
orders all things gently,"? then, possibly, the power whereby
“it reaches from end to end strongly," is called number, while
1 The Pythagorean influence on Augustine's treatment of number is

apparent in the early dialogue De ordine, where the "science of num-

ber” is assigned a kind of primacy in the order of knowledge (2.18.47) .

His sermons and scriptural commentaries often reflect the attitude of

an age fascinated by the sacramental aspect of number and occasion

ingenious pieces of exegesis which at times appear fanciful and ex-
travagant to men of a later day. On the scriptural influence on

Augustine’s notion of number, cf. W. Most, “The Scriptural Basis of

Saint Augustine's Arithmology,” The Catholic Biblical Quarterly 13

(1951) 284-295.
2 Wis. 8.1.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 141

that whereby “it orders all things gently” is here called wis-
dom, though both belong to one and the same wisdom.

31. Wisdom has endowed all things with number, even the
least and those at the lowest confines of the universe. Though
they hold the lowest place in existence, bodies all possess
these numbers. But the capacity for wisdom has not been
given to bodily things or to every kind of soul, but only to
rational souls. It is there that wisdom has, so to speak, taken
up its abode and from where it orders all things it has endowed
with number, even the lowest. Since it is easy for us to judge
about bodily things, occupying, as they do, a place beneath
us, and to see that they have numbers impressed on them
which we also judge to be below us, we therefore set a lower
value upon numbers.

But once we begin to change our course, as it were, to an
upward direction, we discover that number transcends even
our minds and abides unchangingly in truth itself. But since
few men are capable of wisdom, whereas the ability to count
has been given even to fools, men admire wisdom and have
little regard for number. There are, on the other hand, men
learned and devoted to study, and the more these withdraw
from the taint of earthly things, the more clearly they behold
in the truth itself both number and wisdom and hold both in
high esteem. And when they compare truth with gold and
silver and the other things for which men struggle, then not
only these, but even they themselves, appear vile in their sight.

32. It should not surprise you that men have belittled
number and set a high value on wisdom simply because it is
easier for them to count than to acquire wisdom, when you
stop to consider how much more they value gold than the
light of a Jamp, compared to which gold is something trivial.
But greater honor is given something far inferior simply
because even a beggar can light himself a candle, whereas only
a few can possess gold. This is far from implying that, in
comparison with number, wisdom is found inferior, since it
142 SAINT AUGUSTINE

is the same; but it must find an eye capable of discerning
this identity.

Light and heat are perceived coexistent, so to speak, in
the one fire and cannot be separated from each other. Yet,
the heat reaches objects placed near it, while the light is
spread even over a larger area. In like manner, the power of
understanding, present in wisdom, warms what is near it,
such as rational souls, whereas, for things farther removed,
such as bodies, it does not reach them with the warmth of its
wisdom, but permeates them with the light of number. Per-
haps you find this obscure, for no analogy drawn from visible
things to illustrate an invisible reality can be made to fit
perfectly.

Only take note of this point which is enough for our prob-
lem at hand and is clear even to more lowly minds, such as
ours. Though we are unable to see clearly whether number is
contained in wisdom, or is derived from it, or whether wisdom
itself derives from number, and is contained in it, or whether
it can be shown that both are names of the same thing, this
much at least is clear, that both are true and are unchangeably
true.

Chapter 12

33. You would in no way deny, then, that there exists
unchangeable truth that embraces all things that are im-
mutably true. You cannot call this truth mine or yours, or
anyone else's. Rather, it is there to manifest itself as some-
thing common to all who behold immutable truths, as a light
that in wondrous ways is both hidden and public. But how
could anyone say that anything which is present in common
to all endowed with reason and understanding is something
that belongs to the nature of any one of these in particular?
You recall, I believe, the result of our discussion a short time
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 143

ago concerning the bodily senses, namely, that the objects
perceived by us in common by sight and hearing, such as
color and sound, which you and I see and hear together, are
not identified with the nature of our eyes or ears, but are
common objects of our perception. So too, you would never
say that the things each one of us perceives in common with
his own mind, belong to the nature of either of our minds.
You cannot say that what two people perceive at the same
time with their eyes is identified with the eyes of either one;
it is a third something toward which the view of both is
directed.

Ev. 'That is perfectly clear and true.

34. Aug. This truth, therefore, which we have discussed at
length and in which, though it is one, we perceive so many
things—do you think that compared to our minds it is more
excellent, equally excellent, or inferior? Now if it were in-
ferior, we would not be making judgments according to it,
but about it. We do make judgments, for example, about
bodies because they are lower, and we often state not only
that they exist or do not exist this way, but also that they
ought or ought not so to exist. So too with our souls; we not
only know that our soul is in a certain state, but often know
besides that this is the way it ought to be. We also make
similar judgments about bodies, as when we say that a body
is not so bright or so square as it ought to be, and so on, and
also of souls, when we say the soul is not so well disposed as
it ought to be, or that it is not so gentle or not so forceful,
according to the dictates of our moral norms.

We make these judgments according to those rules of truth
within us which we see in common, but no one ever passes
judgment on the rules themselves. For whenever anyone
affirms that the eternal ought to be valued above the things of
time, or that seven and three are ten, no one judges that it
ought to be so, but merely recognizes that it is so. He is not

1 Cf. 27.
144 SAINT AUGUSTINE

an examiner making corrections, but merely a discoverer,
rejoicing over his discovery.

But if this truth were of equal standing with our minds, it
would itself also be changeable. At times our minds see more
of it, at other times less, thereby acknowledging that they
are subject to change. But the truth which abides in itself,
does not increase or decrease by our seeing more or less of it,
but, remaining whole or inviolable, its light brings delight to
those who have turned to it, and punishes with blindness
those who have turned from it.

And what of the fact that we judge about our own minds
in the light of this truth, though we are unable to judge at
all about the truth itself? We say that our mind does not
understand as well as it ought, or that it understands as much
as it ought. But the mind’s understanding should be in pro-
portion to its ability to be drawn more closely and to cling
to the unchangeable truth. Consequently, if truth is neither
inferior nor equal to our minds, it has to be higher and more
excellent.

Chapter 13

35. I had promised to show you, if you recall, that there
is something higher than our mind and reason. There you
have it—truth itself! Embrace it, if you can, and enjoy it;
“find delight in the Lord and He will grant you the peti-
tions of your heart."! For what more do you desire than
to be happy? And who is happier than the man who finds joy
in the firm, changeless, and most excellent truth?

Men proclaim they are happy when they embrace the
beautiful bodies of their wives and even of harlots, which they
desire so passionately, and shall we doubt that we are happy
in the embrace of truth? Men proclaim they are happy when,

1 Ps. 864.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 145

suffering from parched throats, they come to a copious spring
of healthful waters, or, when hungry, they come upon a big
dinner or supper sumptuously prepared. Shall we deny we
are happy when we are refreshed and nourished by truth? We
often hear men proclaim they are happy if they recline amid
roses and other flowers, or delight in the fragrance of oint-
ments, But what is more fragrant, what more delightful, than
the breath of truth? And shall we hesitate to say we are
happy when we are filled with the breath of truth? Many
decide that for them the happy life is found in vocal music
and in the sounds of string instruments and flutes. Whenever
these are absent, they account themselves unhappy, whereas
when they are at hand, they are thrilled with joy. When truth
steals into our minds with a kind of eloquent silence without,
as it were, the noisy intrusion of words, shall we look for
another happy life and not enjoy that which is so sure and
intimately present to us? Men delight in the glitter of gold
and silver, in the lustre of gems, and are delighted by the
charm and splendor of light, whether it be the light in our
own eyes, or that of fires on earth, or the light in the stars,
the moon, or the sun. And they think themselves happy when
they are not withdrawn from these enjoyments by some kind
of trouble or penury, and they would like to go on living
forever for the sake of those delights. And shall we be afraid
to find our happiness in the light of truth?

36. Quite the contrary. Since it is in truth that we know
and possess the highest good, and since that truth is wisdom,
let us see in wisdom our highest good. Let us make it our
aim to enjoy fully, for happy indeed is the man whose
delight is in the highest good.

It is this truth which throws light on all things that are
truly good and which men choose according to their mental
capacity, either singly or severally, for their enjoyment. By
the light of the sun men choose what they like to look at and
find delight in it. If some of them are perchance endowed with
146 SAINT AUGUSTINE

a sound, healthy, and powerful vision, they will like nothing
better than to gaze at the sun itself which also sheds its light
on other things in which weaker eyes find delight. Similarly,
when the sharp and strong vision of the mind beholds a
number of immutable truths known with certainty, it directs
its gaze to truth itself, which illumines all that is true? As
if unmindful of all else, it clings to this truth and, in enjoy-
ing it, enjoys everything else at the same time. For whatever
is delightful in other truths is made delightful by the truth
itself.

37. Our freedom is found in submission to this truth.
And it is our God Himself who frees us from death, namely,
from our sinful condition. It is the Truth Himself, speaking
also as a man with men, who says to those believing in him:
"If you remain in my word, you are indeed my disciples, and
you shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free.”
But the soul is not free in the enjoyment of anything unless
it is secure in that enjoyment.

Chapter 14

Now no one is secure in the possession of goods which can
be lost against his will. But no one loses truth or wisdom
against his will, for he cannot be separated from them by
spatial distances. What we call separation from truth and
wisdom is a perverse will which makes inferior things the
object of its love. But no one wills anything unwillingly.

In possessing truth, therefore, we have something which all
of us can equally enjoy in common, for there is nothing want-
2 Augustine's earlier effort to prove the existence of God by rational

argument would seem to exclude an Ontologistic interpretation of

this passage. For if man’s intellect enjoys in this life a natural and
intuitive vision of God, then His existence can be neither an object of
faith nor of rational demonstration. In the De Genesi ad litteram

(12.97.98, 55-56), he had allowed the vision of God to Moses and St.

Paul, but later rejected this view entirely. Cf. De Trinitate 2.16.27.
3 John 831-32.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 147

ing or defective in it. It welcomes all its lovers without any
envy on their part; it is available to all, yet chaste with each.
No one of them says to another: step back so I too may come
close; take your hands away so I may also embrace it. All
cling to it; all touch the selfsame thing. It is a food never
divided into portions; you drink nothing from it that I can-
not drink. By sharing in it, you make no part of it your
personal possession. I do not have to wait for you to exhale
its fragrance so that I too may draw it in. No part of it ever
becomes the exclusive possession of any one man, or of a few,
but is common to all at the same time in its entirety.!

38. Consequently, the objects we touch or taste or smell
bear less resemblance to such truth than those which we
perceive by hearing and sight. Every word is fully heard by
all who hear it and by each one at the same time; every visible
object before our eyes is seen at the same time as much by
one as by another.

But these analogies are quite remote. No spoken word, for
instance, emits all its sound at the same time, since its sound
is prolonged over intervals of time, one part coming before
another. And every visible object protrudes, so to speak,
through space and is not wholly present everywhere. In any
case, these things can all be taken from us against our will,
and there are obstacles which stand in the way of our being
able to enjoy them.

And even if the beautiful singing of a vocalist were to last
Íorever, his admirers would vie with one another to come to
hear him; they would press about each other, and, as the
crowd became larger, would fight over seats so that each
might be closer to the singer. And as they listened, they could
not take any of the sound to keep for themselves but could
only be caressed by all the fleeting sounds. And if I should
^1 The theoretic principles for Augustine's view of Christian humanism,

expounded in De doctrina christiana (240), stem in part from this

conception of truth, which belongs to all because it belongs to none.

Rationem autem veritatis quae nec mea nec tua est sed utrique nostrum
ad contemplandum proposita . . . (C. Secundinum Manichaeum 2).
148 SAINT AUGUSTINE

wish to gaze at the sun, and were able to do so uninterrupted-
ly, it would leave me at sunset and could be covered over
by a cloud, and I could be forced to give up the pleasure of
seeing it because of many other hindrances. Finally, even if
the delights attached to seeing light and hearing sound were
to be ever present, what great advantage would be mine
since I share this in common with brute animals?

But the beauty of truth and wisdom does not turn away
any who come because the audience is already overcrowded,
provided only that there is a steadfast will to enjoy them.
This beauty does not pass with time or move from place
to place; it is not interrupted by nightfall or concealed by
shadows, and is not at the mercy of the bodily senses. It is
near to all throughout the world who have made it the object
of their love, and belongs to them forever. It occupies no
one place and is nowhere absent; outwardly, it admonishes
us, inwardly, it teaches us.? All who behold it are changed for
the better, and no one can change it for the worse. No one
passes judgment on it, and without it no one can judge
aright. Hence it is clear, beyond doubt, that truth is superior
to our minds, each one of which is made wise by it alone,
and is made a judge, not of truth itself, but of all other
things in the light of truth.

Chapter 15

39, You granted that if I could prove that there was some-
thing above our minds, you would admit it was God, provided
that there was still nothing higher. I agreed and stated that
it would be enough for me to prove this point. For if there
is anything more excellent, then this is God; if not, then truth
itself is God. In either case, you cannot deny that God exists,

2 The same theme is developed in De magistro, a dialogue between

Augustine and his son, Adeodatus, composed about the year 389;
translated in the opening pages of this volume.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 149

which was the question we proposed to examine in our dis-
cussion. If you are uneasy because of what we have received
on faith through the hallowed teaching of Christ, namely,
that there is a Father of Wisdom, then remember that we
have accepted this also on faith, namely, that the Wisdom
begotten of the eternal Father is equal to Him. We are not
to inquire further about this just now, but only to accept it
with an unshaken faith.

God exists indeed, and He exists truly and most perfectly.
As I see it, we not only hold this as certain by our faith,
but we also arrive at it by a sure, though, as yet, very inade-
quate form of knowledge. But this is sufficient for the matter
at hand and will enable us to explain the other points that
have a bearing on the subject, unless, of course, you have
some objections to raise.

Ev. Y accept all this, overwhelmed as I am with an in-
credible joy which I am unable to express to you in words. I
declare that it is absolutely certain. I do so, prompted by
that inner voice which makes me want to hear the truth itself
and to cling to it. I not only grant that this is good, but also
that it is the highest good and the source of happiness.

40. Aug. You are certainly right. I too rejoice exceedingly.
But I will ask you whether we are already wise and happy,
or whether we are still striving to make this our goal.

Ev. Y think rather we are striving toward it.

Aug. How then do you grasp those things which you re-
joice in as being true and certain? You do grant that an
understanding of them pertains to wisdom. Can a foolish
man know wisdom?

Ev. Not while he remains foolish.

Aug. Then you must now be wise, or else you do not yet
know wisdom.

Ev. I am, to be sure, not yet wise, but, insofar as I do know
wisdom, I would say that I am not foolish. For I cannot deny
that the things I know are certain, and that this is wisdom.
150 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Aug. Please answer me this question: will you not grant that
a man who is not just is unjust, and the man who is not
prudent is imprudent, and the man who is not temperate is
intemperate? Can there be any doubt about it?

Ev. I grant that when a man is not just, he is unjust, and
I would give the same answer regarding the prudent and
temperate man.

Aug. Why, then, is a man not foolish when he is not wise?

Ev. 'This I will also admit, that when a man is not wise,
he is foolish.

Aug. Now which one of the two are you?

Ev. Whichever one you want to call me, for I dare not say
that I am wise. Yet, I see how it follows from what I have
admitted that I should not hesitate to say I am foolish.

Aug. Then the foolish man knows wisdom. For, as we have
stated, he would not be sure he wanted to be wise, and that
he ought to be so, unless the notion of wisdom were fixed in
his mind; fixed in his mind, as are those things pertaining
to wisdom itself about which, when questioned one by one,
you replied, and in the knowledge of which you found delight.

Ev. It is just as you say.

Chapter 16

41. Aug. In our effort to be wise as quickly as possible, what
else do we do but concentrate our soul wholly upon what
the mind has discovered, and make this its permanent abode?
As a result, the soul will no longer take delight in any
individual good of its own that entangles it in things of
a transitory nature but, once stripped of its attachment for
the things of time and place, it will take hold of that which
is forever one and the same. Just as the soul is the total source
of life for the body, so is God the source of happiness for
the soul. While we are engaged in this task, and until we
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 151

have finished it, we are wayfarers. And if it is now granted
us to enjoy those true and certain goods which cast their
light along our darksome journey, take note whether this be
not the very thing which Scripture says about the way Wis-
dom acts towards its lovers when they come in search of it:
“She shows herself to them cheerfully in the ways, and meets
them with all providence.”?

Turn where you will, wisdom speaks to you by the imprint
it has left on its works, and, when you are slipping back into
what is outward, it entices you to return within by the beauty
of those very forms found in things external. This is done
so you may recognize that whatever delights you in a body and
attracts you by the bodily senses is imbued with number.
Thus, you must search for its source and return within your-
self and come to see that it is not possible to pass judgment,
favorable or unfavorable, on things known by the bodily
senses unless you have at your disposal a knowledge of certain
laws governing beauty to which you refer whatever objects
you perceive outwardly.?

42. Look at the heavens and the earth and the sea, and at
all the things they contain. Whether these shine from above
or crawl on the earth below, or fly or swim, they all have
forms because they possess number. Take away number from
them, and they are nothing. What then, is the source of
their existence but that same source where number derives,
since, in fact, they enjoy existence only insofar as they are
possessed of number?

Even men who create beauty in working with bodily
materials make use of numbers in their art and fashion
their products in accordance with them. While producing
their work, they manipulate their hands and tools until what

1 Wis. 6.13.

2 While a Manichaean, Augustine had composed a work on esthetics,
De pulchro et apto, which was no longer extant at the time he wrote
the Confessions (4.18.20). The present discussion reveals a marked
dependence upon Plotinus treatise On the Beautiful. Cf. Enneads

(169).
152 SAINT AUGUSTINE

is being formed externally is made as perfectly as possible to
conform with the inward light of number. Then, through
the senses as intermediaries, it wins the approval of the mind
which judges within, as it contemplates the higher realm of
numbers. Ask me next what it is that moves the bodily mem-
bers of the artisan and it will be found to be number, for even
they move in a measured rhythm. If you take from his hand
what he is making, and from his mind the intention to make
something, then that bodily movement is calculated to give
delight, and is called pantomime. Ask what there is in panto-
mime to cause delight, and number will answer that it is
present there.

Now examine the beauty of a graceful body, and number
will be found at work in space. Examine beauty in bodily
movement, and you will see how number plays a role in the
proper timing. Enter into the realm of art where number has
its origin, and try to find time and place there. You will find
there neither place nor time, and yet it is there that number
has its abode. This realm of number is devoid of spaces, nor
is its duration measured in terms of days. Yet, when men
desirous of becoming artists set about the task of learning
this art, they are moving their bodies in space and time, but
their soul they move only in time; and with the passing of
time they become more proficient in their art.

Now go beyond even the soul of the artist to get a view
of the eternal realm of number. Wisdom will now shine upon
you from its inner abode and from the very sanctuary of
truth. If your gaze, as yet weak, recoils from this light, turn
the mind's eye back along the way where "wisdom showed
herself cheerfully." Only remember that you have put off for
a time a vision which you will seek again when you are
stronger and sounder.

43. O Wisdom, O Light most pleasing to a mind made
pure! Woe to those who forsake your guidance and grope
about among your shadowy imitations and, more enamored
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 153

of your signs than of you, are forgetful of what you wish to
intimate. For you never cease to intimate your nature and
excellence to us, and the entire beauty of created things
consists in these signs, The artist, too, through the beauty
of his work, intimates in a way to the viewer of it that he
should not fasten his attention there completely but should
so scan the beauty of the artistic work that he will turn his
thoughts back fondly upon him who made it. Those who
love the things you make instead of yourself are like men
who listen to the eloquence of a wise man. In their overeager-
ness to hear his beautiful voice and the skillful cadence of
his words, they neglect the primary importance of his thoughts
for which the spoken words were to serve as signs.

Woe to those who turn away from your light and are
delighted to cling to their own darkness. Turning their back,
so to speak, upon you, they are enchained by works of the
flesh as by their own shadow,? and yet, even such delight as
they experience there, comes to them from the encompassing
rays of your light. But while love of the shadow continues,
it makes the mind’s eye weaker and less able to endure the
sight of your presence. Hence, so long as a man prefers to
pursue whatever is easier for his weakened condition to en-
dure, the more is he encompassed in darkness, This is the
beginning of his inability to see that which exists most per-
fectly, and he begins to judge as evil whatever deceives him
through want of foresight, or appeals to his impoverished con-
dition, or torments him in his state of captivity. Yet he is
justly suffering these penalties for having turned from wisdom;
and what is just cannot be evil.

44. Hence, if you take a look at any changeable reality, you
will be unable to grasp it either by the bodily senses or by
mental reflection unless it is held together by some numerical
determinant, without which it will fall back into nothing.
Have no doubt that there exists an eternal and changeless

3 A clear allusion to Plato's allegory of the "cave" in Book Seven of the
Republic.
154 SAINT AUGUSTINE

form which keeps such changeable things from losing their
existence and enables them to pass, as it were, through the
phases of their temporal duration by the regularity of their
movements and their separate and varied forms. Such a form
is neither circumscribed by place nor spread, as it were,
through space; nor is it extended or changed in the course of
time. In virtue of this form, all changeable realities are able
to receive their forms, each according to its nature, and to
realize fully their numerical perfection in place and time.

Chapter 17

45. Every changeable reality must also be capable of re-
ceiving form. Just as we call something changeable which
is capable of undergoing change, so I would call "formable,"
whatever is capable of receiving form.! But nothing can im-
part form to itself, because nothing can give itself what it
does not have, and, surely, a thing is given form so that it
may have form. So if anything possesses form, there is no
need for it to receive what it has, But if it does not have form,
it cannot receive from itself what it does not have. Nothing,
therefore, as we have said, can give itself form, Now what
more can we say about the changing nature of body and soul,
since enough has been said previously? We may conclude,
then, that body and soul both receive forms from an im-
mutable and everlasting form, with reference to which it was
said: “Thou shalt change them and they shall be changed,
but Thou art forever the same and thy years fail not.”? The
Prophet spoke of years that do not fail to indicate eternity.

I In the third of his commentaries on the Book of Genesis, De Genesi
ad litteram, Augustine states that by one single act God produced
simultaneously both “unformed matter” and “form,” and that the
former is prior only by the priority of nature and not of time (1.15.29).

2 Ps. 5127.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 155

Of the same form it is likewise said that “abiding in itself, it
renews all things.”

By this we may also understand that all things are ruled
by providence. If everything in existence would become
nothing, once form was entirely taken away, then this un-
changeable form is itself their providence. Through it all
changing realities subsist so as to achieve their perfection and
movements by the numerical principles belonging to their
forms, If this form did not exist, these would have no being.
Accordingly, the man who is making his way toward wisdom
will see, as he gazes thoughtfully upon the whole of creation,
how wisdom reveals itself cheerfully to him along the way
and comes to meet him with all providential care. And he
will yearn all the more eagerly to complete this journey as
the path itself is made more beautiful by that wisdom which
he so ardently desires to reach.

46. If you are able to find some other class of creature
besides that which exists without life, and that which exists
with life but without understanding, and that which exists
with life and understanding, then you might venture to
affirm that there is something good which does not come from
God. These three classes may even be expressed by two
words, if we call them body and life. For that which has only
life and no understanding, as animals, and that which has
understanding, as man, are rightly said to have life. Now
these two, namely, body and life, are reckoned among things
created, since we also speak of life of the Creator Himself, and
this is the highest form of life. Since these two, namely, body
and life, are capable of receiving form, as our earlier remarks
have shown, and since they would fall back into nothingness
were all form to be taken away, they give sufficient indica-
tion that they owe their existence to that form which is
always the same.

Consequently, all good things, however great or small, can

3 Wis. 7.27.
156 SAINT AUGUSTINE

only come from God. What can be greater among creatures
than life endowed with understanding, or what can be less
than body? No matter how far these deteriorate and tend
towards nothingness, something of form remains in them to
give them such existence as they have. Whatever form is left
in anything undergoing such deterioration, comes to it from
that form which knows no deterioration and which does not
permit even the movements of things, whether towards prog-
ress or deterioration, to go beyond the limits imposed by
their numbers. Consequently, whatever we find praiseworthy
in nature, whether it be deemed worthy of great or of slight
praise, must be referred to the highest and unspeakable praise
of the Creator. But you may have something further to add.

Chapter 18

47, Ev. 1 am, 1 admit, sufficiently convinced that God exists
and that all goods come from God, so far as such evidence is
possible in the present life and for men like ourselves, All
existing things come from God, whether they have under-
standing and life and existence, or have only life and exist-
ence, or have only existence. Now let us examine the third
question to see whether it can be shown that free will should
be reckoned among things that are good. Once this is proven,
I will have no hesitation in granting that God gave it to us
and that it is something that should have been given.

Aug. You recall very well the questions proposed, and you
were quick to notice that the second question has already
been cleared up. But you should have seen that the third
was also settled. You gave it as your opinion that free will
should not have been given because people commit sin by
it. In opposition to your view, I retorted that moral conduct
is only possible by free will and went on to assert that God had
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 157

given it for this purpose.! You replied that free will should
have been given us in the same way as justice, which one can
only use rightly. This reply of yours compelled us to embark
upon these roundabout discussions to prove that good things,
great and small, come from God alone. This point could
only be clarified after we had refuted the wicked folly ex-
pressed by the fool who said in his heart, “there is no God."?
Some kind of reasoning, suited to our feeble mentality, was
undertaken on this important matter in order to give us
something certain by way of conclusion, while God Himself
was helping us along so perilous a course. Although these two
truths, namely, that God exists, and that all good things come
from Him, were at first held firmly by faith, they have now
been examined in such a way that this third truth is mani-
festly evident, namely, that free will must be numbered among
things that are good.

48. In an earlier discussion it was proven and agreed upon
by us that a corporeal nature occupies a lower place in
existence than does the nature of the soul, and that the soul
is therefore a greater good than the body. If, then, among
goods of the body we find some which man can misuse, we
do not say that they should not therefore have been given,
since we do acknowledge that these are good. We should not
be surprised then if we also find in the soul some goods which
we can also misuse. But because they are good, they could
only be given by Him from whom all good things come.

You can see how a great good is wanting in a body having
no hands; yet a man who perpetrates cruel and shameful
deeds with them makes bad use of his hands. If you were to
see someone with no feet, you would admit that an important
good is wanting to the body’s integrity, and yet you could not
deny that a man who uses his feet to injure someone or to
disgrace himself is making bad use of his feet.

1 A passage exploited by Pelagius in his attack upon Augustine’s teach-
ing on grace.
2 Ps. 13.1.
158 SAINT AUGUSTINE

With our eyes we can perceive light and distinguish bodily
forms one from another. This power of sight is the noblest
endowment of our body and for this reason these organs
have been given a kind of exalted place of honor in our body.
Our eyes also serve to protect health and furnish many other
benefits to life. Yet, many men do much that is shameful
with their eyes and enlist them to serve the cause of lust.
You can see what a great good is wanting to a face having no
eyes, but when we possess them, who else has given them but
God, the Giver of all goods?

Just as you look favorably upon these goods in the body
and praise Him who gave them, without regard to those who
misuse them, so you should also grant that free will, without
which no one can live right, is good and is given by God.
You should further acknowledge that those who misuse this
good should be condemned rather than admit that He who
gave free will should not have given it.

49, Ev. I would like you to prove for me first that free will
is a good, and then I would grant that God gave it to us,
because I acknowledge that all things good come from God.

Aug. Have I failed then to prove this to you after so much
effort in our earlier discussion? You granted at the time that
the beauty and form of a body are wholly derived from the
supreme form of all things, namely, the truth, and that these
are good, Truth itself says in the Gospel that even the hairs
of our head are numbered. Have you forgotten what we said
about the supremacy of number and how its power extends
from end to end? What perversity to count the hairs of our
head, small and lowly as they are, among things good, and
fail to discover their cause and to see that God alone is the
Creator of everything good, since all good things, great and
small, derive from Him, from whom comes every good. Again,
what perversity to doubt about free will, without which it is
impossible to lead an upright life, as even they acknowledge
who live wickedly.
^8 Cf. Matt. 10.80.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 159

In any case, please tell me now which you think is the
higher good in us. Is it that without which we can live
rightly, or that without which we cannot live rightly?

Ev. Please go easy on me, for I am ashamed that I could
not see this. How could anyone doubt that that without
which there can be no right living is the more excellent good
by far?

Aug. Would you deny then that a man with one eye can
live rightly?

Ev. May I never be guilty of such colossal folly!

Aug. Since you grant, then, that the eye is something good
in the body, even though its loss is no hindrance to leading a
good life, will you take the view that free will is not a
good, when no one can live rightly without it?

50. Think of justice, which no one can put to bad use. It
is reckoned among the greatest goods found in man and
among all the virtues of the soul which make for a good and
upright life. Nor does anyone put to bad use the virtues of
prudence or courage or temperance. In all these virtues, as
well as in justice itself, which you mentioned, it is right
reason that prevails, and without it the virtues cannot exist.
But no one can put right reason to a bad use.

Chapter 19

These virtues are, therefore, great goods. But you must
remember that not only the great but even the least goods
exist through Him alone from whom all good things come,
namely, from God. Our earlier discussion led to this con-
clusion, to which you gladly gave assent time after time.

As I was saying, these virtues which enable us to live
rightly are great goods, whereas all forms of bodily beauty
are the least goods, since we can live rightly without them.
But the powers of the soul, without which there can be no
160 SAINT AUGUSTINE

right living, are intermediate goods. No one puts virtues
to a bad use, but anyone can put the other goods, namely,
the intermediate and least, not only to good, but also to
bad use. So no one puts virtues to bad use, since the function
of virtue is the good use of those things which we can also
put to bad use. No one makes bad use of what he puts to
good use. Accordingly, the vast liberality of God’s goodness
has brought into existence not only the great, but also the
intermediate and least goods. His goodness is more to be
praised for the great than for the intermediate goods, and
more for the intermediate than for the least goods, but still
to be praised more for all of them than if He had not given
existence to them all.

51. Ev. I agree. But, since in our discussion of free will we
see that it can make either good or bad use of other things,
I am perplexed as to how free will is to be numbered among
the things which we use.

Aug. In the same way that our reason gives us certain
knowledge of all that we know, though reason itself is num-
bered among the things we know by reason. Have you for-
gotten that when we were inquiring as to what reason could
know, you admitted that reason too is known by reason? If
we make use of other things by our free will, you must not
therefore think it strange that we can also make use of free
will by free will itself. As in using other things, the will is
making use of itself, so in knowing other things, reason also
knows itself. Memory, too, embraces not only all the other
things we remember, but, by our not forgetting that we have
a memory, it also remains somehow within us. It remembers
not only other things but also itself; or better yet, it is by
memory that we remember ourselves, other things, and
memory itself.

52. Consequently, a man possesses the happy life when
his will, an intermediate good, clings to the changeless good.
This is not his own good exclusively but is common to all,
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 161

like truth, which we discussed at length without doing it
justice. And this happy life, namely, the state of the soul
in union with the changeless good, is man’s proper and prin-
cipal good. In this good, too, are found all the virtues which
no one can put to bad use. And while these are important
and principal goods in man, we understand well enough that
they belong to each man and are not the common possession
of all.

Men become wise and happy by clinging to truth and
wisdom, which are common to all. But one man does not be-
come happy by the happiness of another. Even when he
emulates the happy man in order to be happy himself, he
seeks happiness from the same source which he knows made
the first man happy, namely, the truth, which is changeless
and common to all. Nor does one man become prudent or
courageous or temperate or just by the presence of these
virtues in another. But he acquires these by conforming his
soul to the changeless norms and beacons of the virtues,
which abide indestructibly in truth itself and in wisdom,
which are common to all. The man whose soul is conformed
and fixed to these principles is endowed with such virtues
and is set up as an example for one's imitation.

53. By adhering to the changeless good, which is common
to all, the will acquires the principal and important goods,
though the will is itself an intermediate good. But when
it turns away from the changeless good, common to all,
and turns towards a good of its own, or to an external or
lower good, then the will sins. It turns towards a good of its
own whenever it wants to be its own master; to an external
good, when it is eager to know the personal affairs of others,
or whatever is none of its own business; to a lower good,
when it loves the pleasures of the body. Thus, a man who
becomes proud, curious, and sensuous is delivered over to
another kind of life which, in comparison with the higher
life, is a death. And yet, this life is subject to the rule of
162 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Divine Providence, which assigns everything to its proper place
and gives to each one his due.

As a consequence, neither those goods sought after by
sinners are in any way evil, nor free will itself, which we
found was to be counted among the intermediate goods. Evil
consists rather in the will’s turning away from the change-
less good and in its turning to goods that are changeable.
Since this turning from one thing to another is not done from
necessity, but freely, the unhappiness which results is justly
deserved.

Chapter 20

54. Since the will undergoes movement when it turns
from the unchangeable to the changeable good, you may
perhaps ask how this movement originates. It is really evil,
though free will must be reckoned as a good, since it is
impossible to live rightly without it. For if this movement,
namely, the turning away of the will from the Lord, is un-
questionably sinful, we could not say, could we, that God is
the cause of sin? If this movement, therefore, does not come
from God, then where does it come from?

If I reply to your question by saying that I do not know,
you may be distressed all the more. Yet, I would be answering
you correctly, because what is nothing, cannot be known.
Only make sure to hold firm to your religious conviction that
you know of no good, either by the senses, or by the intellect,
or in any other way, that does not come from God. Hence, no
kind of nature will be found that does not come from God.
Wherever you find things possessed of measure, number, and
order, have no hesitation in ascribing them all to God their
Maker. Remove these three from things entirely, and nothing
at all will be left. Even were some vestige of an inchoative
form to remain where you see no measure or number or order
(since wherever these exist, form is complete), you would have
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 163

to disallow even this inchoative form, since this seems to serve
as material which the maker must bring to perfection. For,
if the full perfection of form is a good, the beginning of
form is something good. Hence, if all good is taken away en-
tirely, there will remain not something, but nothing at all.
All good is from God and, consequently, there is no nature
that is not from God. Hence, that movement of the soul’s
turning away, which we admitted was sinful, is a defective
movement, and every defect arises from non-being. Look for
the source of this movement and be sure that it does not come
from God.

Yet, since it is voluntary, this defect lies within our power.
If you are fearful of it, then your will is against it, and unless
you will it, it will not exist. What could be more secure
than to live a life where nothing can happen to you which
you do not will? But, since man cannot rise of his own will
as he fell of his own will, the right hand of God, namely,
our Lord Jesus Christ, is outstretched to us from above.
Let us embrace Him with a strong faith, await Him with a
sure hope, and love Him with an ardent charity.

If you think there is something further that we should
investigate more carefully on the origin of sin—I see no
need for it at all—but if you think there is, it will have to
be put off for another discussion.

Ev. Y will certainly comply with your wish to put off for
another time the problems arising from our discussion, For
I cannot agree with your view that this matter has already
been sufficiently investigated.

1 This clear and explicit statement on the necessity of grace is one of
several referred to in the Retractations as anticipating the errors of
Pelagius (1.94-6).
BOOK THREE
Chapter 1

1. Ev. Since it is clear enough to me now that free will must
be reckoned among things good, and not among the least of
them, to be sure, we are therefore forced to admit that it was
given by God and that it should have been given. If you
deem the question opportune, I would like to find out from
you the cause of that movement by which the will itself
turns from the unchangeable good, common to all, and turns
towards individual goods, either those of others or the lowest
goods, and why, for that matter, it turns to all kinds of
transitory goods.

Aug. Why do we have to know this?

Ev. Because if the free will given to us is such that this
movement comes from its nature, then it turns to these goods
of necessity, and where nature and necessity rule, there is
no culpability.

Aug. Do you approve of this movement or not?

Ev. I disapprove.

Aug. Then you think it is blameworthy?

Ev. Yes, I do.

Aug. Then you are blaming a movement of the soul that
is blameless.

Ev. 1 am not laying blame on any movement of the soul
that is blameless. I simply do not know whether a fault is
committed when one abandons the unchangeable good and
turns towards goods that are changeable.

Aug. Then you are blaming something you do not know.

Ev. Do not press me over the use of words. I did not know

164
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 165

whether there is any fault committed. I meant to say that
there certainly is a fault and when I said I did not know,
I really meant to ridicule any doubt concerning something so
obvious.

Aug. See just what that very obvious truth is which made
you forget what you said a short while ago. If that movement
of the soul arises from nature or necessity, it can in no way
be blameworthy. But now you are maintaining that it is
blameworthy so tenaciously that you think any doubt about
so obvious a matter deserves to be ridiculed. Why, then, have
you seen fit to assert, or at least to propose as somewhat
doubtful, something which you yourself now show to be mani-
festly untrue? You said: “If the free will given to us is such
that this movement comes from its nature, then it turns to
these goods of necessity, and where nature and necessity rule,
there is no culpability.” Since you have no doubt that this
movement is blameworthy, you should have had no doubt
at all that this was not the kind of will given to us.

Ev. I termed this movement blameworthy, and therefore
stated that I disapproved of it and could not doubt that it
is blameworthy.! But I do deny that the soul is culpable when
it is drawn by this movement from the unchangeable good
to changeable goods, if its nature is such that it is drawn
there by necessity.

2. Aug. Whose movement is it that you admit is really
blameworthy?

Ev. I see now it is in the soul, but I do not know whose it is.

Aug. Do you deny that the soul moves by this movement?

Ev. 1 do not.

Aug. Then do you deny that a movement which moves a
stone belongs to the stone? I am not speaking of that motion
by which we move a stone, or where it is moved by some ex-

1 The problem of the origin of evil is crucial to Augustine's refutation
of Manichaean dualism. While indebted to Plotinus for the notion of
evil as privation, he could not accept the further view that evil is
necessary or that matter itself is essentially evil.
166 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ternal force, as when it is thrown up in the air, but of the
movement by which a stone tends downward of its own force
and falls to the ground.

Ev. I do not deny, of course, that the movement by which a
stone, as you say, changes its direction to return to the earth
belongs to the stone, but I do say that this movement comes
from its nature. Now if the soul also has this kind of move-
ment, then it too is determined by nature and cannot be
blamed since its movement is fixed by nature. Even if this
movement should bring the soul to ruin, it is driven there by
a necessity of its nature. Since, on the contrary, we are certain
that this movement is voluntary, we must simply deny that it
is determined by nature. Consequently, it is unlike the move-
ment which moves the stone by a natural necessity.

Aug. Have we accomplished anything in our two previous
discussions?

Ev. We have, indeed.

Aug. I believe you recall that in our first discussion it was
shown to our satisfaction that the mind becomes a slave of
sinful desire only by its own will? For it cannot be forced
into such a shameful condition by anything superior or equal
to it, which would be unjust, or by anything beneath it,
which is impossible. We must conclude that the movement by
which the soul turns for its delight away from God towards
the creature is its own movement. If this movement is looked
upon as culpable—and you thought it was ridiculous for any-
one to doubt it—then it is not determined by nature, but is
voluntary. It resembles in this respect the movement of the
stone in its downward course, since one movement belongs to
the soul just as the other belongs to the stone. But it is unlike
it in another respect, namely, that it is not within the power
of the stone to check its downward movement, whereas, while
the soul is unwilling, its movement does not make it love
lesser goods by forsaking those that are higher. Hence, the

214121.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 167

movement for the stone is fixed by nature, while that of the
soul is voluntary. So if anyone says that the stone sins because
it tends downward by its own weight, I will not say he has
less sense than the stone, but he is certainly thought to be
out of his mind. But we charge the soul with sin when we
find it guilty of having forsaken what is higher to find its
enjoyment in what is lower.

What need, then, is there to look for a cause of that move-
ment by which the soul turns from the unchangeable to a
changeable good? We agree that it belongs to the soul alone
and is voluntary, and, consequently, culpable. Furthermore,
all practical instruction in this matter has this for its aim,
that, renouncing and restraining this kind of movement, we
turn our will from the instability of temporal things to the
enjoyment of the everlasting good.

8. Ev. I see and can almost touch and grasp the truth of
what you say. There is nothing I perceive so surely and in-
timately as the fact that I have a will which moves me to
find delight in anything. But if this power which enables me
to will or not to will is not mine, then I cannot readily find
anything to call my own. So if I do wrong by my will, to what
can I impute the act, if not to myself? Since it is the good
God who made me, and I can do good only by my will, it is
clear enough that the good God gave it to me for this purpose.

But if the movement by which the will can turn in differ-
ent directions were not voluntary and subject to our control,
a man ought not to be praised or blamed when, so to speak,
he turns the hinge of his will in the opposite directions
of higher and lower goods. And there would be no need at
all to admonish him to neglect things temporal and to strive
for the possessions of the eternal, or to try to lead a good
rather than a bad life. But anyone who would think that man
should not be so admonished, should be banished from the
company of men.

3 Another passage appropriated by Pelagius to support his teaching on
the freedom of the wil
168 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 2

4, This being the case, I am perplexed beyond words as
to how God can have foreknowledge of all things future
and yet we are not compelled by any necessity to sin. Were
anyone to assert that something can take place otherwise
than God foreknew it, he would attempt to destroy God's
foreknowledge by the wildest kind of blasphemy.

God foreknew, then, that the first man would sin, which
anyone will have to admit who agrees with me that God
knows all future events. If this therefore is true, I do not say
that God should not have made him, for He made him good,
or that the sin of him, whom God made good, could cause
any injury to God. In fact, in making man, God manifested
His goodness, and in punishing him, He also manifests His
justice, and in redeeming him, manifests His mercy. So I do
not say that God should not have made him, but I will say
that, insofar as God foreknew that man was going to sin,
that had to take place which God foreknew was going to
happen. How, therefore, is the will free where there appears
to be such inevitable necessity?

5. Aug. You have been knocking hard at the door of God's
mercy. May He come to our help and open it to those who
stand knocking. I do think, however, that men for the most
part are tormented by this problem only because they fail
to pursue their inquiry in a religious spirit and are quicker
to excuse their sins than they are to confess them. Or they
prefer to think that divine providence does not rule over
human affairs, and, surrendering body and soul to blind
chance, they give themselves over to lust, to be battered and
torn asunder. By denying God's judgments and evading the
judgment of men, they fancy they can ward off their accusers
through protection from the goddess Fortune. Yet, they
usually depict her in statues and paintings as blind, so that
they may be better off than Fortune, by which they think
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 169

they are ruled, or may acknowledge that this same blindness
prompts them to think and say such things. It would not be
preposterous to admit that such men do everything by the
falling out of chance, since their every action is a sort of fall.
But I feel we have said enough in our second discussion
against this opinion, which is replete with the most foolish
and senseless kind of error.*

But there are others who, while not daring to deny that
God's providence rules over men's lives, prefer to subscribe
to the wicked and erroneous belief that this providence is
weak or unjust or evil, rather than to confess their sins in a
spirit of humble piety. Whenever these conceive of that
Being who is most good, just, and powerful, they should all
be open to the conviction that God's goodness and justice
and power are far greater and higher than anything they
conceive in their mind. And they should further understand,
if they examine themselves, that they would have a duty to
give thanks to God even if He had willed to make them
something less perfect than they are, and they should exclaim
with all their heart and from the depths of their soul, “I
have said: Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul because I
have sinned against thee."? Thus they would be led to wisdom
along the sure path of divine mercy; they would neither be
proud over what they had discovered, nor disheartened about
what remains to be discovered; their knowledge would make
them more fit for contemplation, while their ignorance would
make them pursue their inquiry with great humility. I have no
doubt that you are convinced of this, but you must see now
how easy it was for me to answer such an important question
once you had replied to a few questions of my own.

Chapter 3

6. You are undoubtedly perplexed and puzzled by the prob-

1 Cf. 2.17 45.
2 Ps. 40.5.
170 SAINT AUGUSTINE

lem as to how these two positions are not mutually op-
posed and incompatible, namely, that God foreknows all
Íuture events and yet we sin freely and not of necessity. If
God foreknows that man will sin, then you will say that he
must sin, and if this has to happen, there is no freedom of
the will in the act of sinning, but rather an inevitable and
unbending necessity. You are afraid that our reasoning will
lead either to the impious denial of God's foreknowledge, or,
if that is impossible, to our having to admit that we do not
sin freely, but of necessity. Is there something else troubling
you?

Ev. Nothing else just now.

Aug. So it is your opinion that everything foreknown by
God takes place of necessity, and not freely.

Ev. 1 certainly think so.

Aug. Pay attention for heaven's sake! Examine yourself
for a moment, if you can, and tell me whether you are going
to will something sinful tomorrow or something good?

Ev. 1 do not know.

Aug. Do you think that God does not know it either?

Ev. I could never believe that.

Aug. If God knows what you are going to will tomorrow,
and if He foresees what every man now and in the future is
going to will, then all the more does He foresee how He will
deal with the just and the wicked.

Ev. Obviously, if I say that God has foreknowledge of my
actions, I must say with much greater assurance that He
foreknows His own and foresees with absolute certainty
what He is going to do.

Aug. If everything which God foreknows happens of
necessity and not freely, are you not afraid that someone may
counter by saying that God will also do whatever He is
going to do, not freely, but of necessity?

Ev. When I stated that those things happen of necessity
which God foreknows, I had in mind only those which occur
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 171

in His creation, but not those which take place within Him;
actually, these do not come into existence, but are eternally
present in Him.

Aug. Then God does nothing in His creation?

Ev. God has decreed once and for all that order is to be
achieved in the universe which He created, and He does not
govern anything by a new decree of His will.

Aug. Does not God make anyone happy?

Ev. He does indeed.

Aug. When a man is made happy, God is certainly acting at
that time.

Ev. That is true.

Aug. If, for example, you are going to be happy a year
from now, God will make you happy a year from now.

Ev. Yes.

Aug. Then He has foreknowledge today of what He will do
a year from now.

Ev. He always had foreknowledge of it. I agree once more
that He foreknows this, if this is what is going to happen.

7. Aug. Please tell me whether you are His creature, and
whether your happiness is something that will be realized
within you.

Ev. Of course I am His creature and my future happiness
will come about within me.

Aug. So your happiness will be realized in you, not freely,
but from necessity, through God's action.

Ev. God's will is necessity for me.

Aug. So you will be happy against your will?

Ev. If the power to be happy were mine, I would certainly
be happy already. I want to be happy even now, and I am
not because it is not I but God who makes me happy.

Aug. The voice of truth is making itself heard very well
in you. If our very act of willing is not in our power, then
you could not be conscious of anything else that is. Hence
172 SAINT AUGUSTINE

nothing is so much in our power as the will itself! for it is
there at hand the very instant that we will something. Thus,
we may truly say that we do not age freely, but of necessity,
or that we do not fall ill freely, but of necessity, or that we
do not die freely, but of necessity, and so on. But not even a
madman would venture to assert that we do not will by our
will.

Consequently, though God foreknows what we are going to
will in the future, it does not thereby follow that we are
not willing something freely. As for happiness, you stated
that you could not become happy of yourself, as if I had
denied it. I do maintain that when you come to be happy,
you will become so, not against your will, but willingly. Since
God has foreknowledge of your future happiness, and since
nothing can happen differently than He has foreknown it, or
there would be no foreknowledge, we do not have to suppose
on this account that you will be happy without willing it.
Such a supposition would be absurd and far from the truth.
Just as God's foreknowledge of your happiness, which He
knows for certain even today, does not take away your will for
happiness at the time you begin to be happy, so too, a sinful
will, should it ever be yours in the future, will not cease to
be your will because God foreknew its future.

8. See, if you will, how anyone could make such a blind
assertion as this: "If God has foreknowledge of my future
will, then I am necessitated to will what He has foreknown,
since nothing can happen differently than God has fore-
known it. But if I am necessitated, we must admit that I
no longer will freely, but of necessity." What sheer folly! Why
could not something happen other than God foreknew, if
what God foreknew as a future will is not a will? I pass over
the equally astounding assertion, which I mentioned a moment
ago, of the man who said he was necessitated to will the way
he did. He is trying to destroy the will by presupposing

1 A further passage alleged by Pelagius as supporting his doctrine of
man's moral sufficiency.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL. 173

necessity, for if he is necessitated to will, how can he will
when there is no will?

If he says, instead, that the will itself is not within his
power because he is necessitated to will, he will come up
against the same answer you gave when I asked whether you
would be happy in the future against your will. You replied
that you would already be happy if it were within your power,
for you said you had the will, but not yet the power, to be-
come happy. At that point I interjected the remark that the
voice of truth was making itself heard in you, for we can-
not deny that we have the power unless we fail to make our
own the very thing we are willing. But if the will itself is
not at our disposal while we will, then, of course, we are not
willing at all. But if it is impossible for us not to will while
we are willing, then the will is present to us whenever we will.
There is nothing in our power except that which is present
while we are willing. Unless, then, it is within our power,
our will is no will. Furthermore, it is because the will is in
our power that it is free. What is not within our power, or
cannot be, does not come under our freedom.

Accordingly, we do not deny God’s foreknowledge of all
things future, and yet we do will what we will. Since God
has foreknowledge of our will, its future will be such as He
foreknows it. It will be a will precisely because He foreknows
it as a will, and it could not be a will if it were not in our
power. Hence God also has foreknowledge of our power
over it. The power, then, is not taken from me because of
His foreknowledge, since this power will be mine all the
more certainly because of the infallible foreknowledge of
Him who foreknew that I would have it.?

2 Consistent with the main purpose of defending man’s freedom against
the Manichaeans, Augustine insists that God’s foreknowledge does not
destroy but rather presupposes such freedom. Efforts to interpret his
words in favor of the respective schools of Molina and Bafiez have
proved inconclusive. As 8. Grabowski observes: “In this matter no
support for either side can be gained from the writing of Saint
Augustine” (The All-Present God [Saint Louis 1954] 154).
174 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Ev. See, now I no longer deny that everything must happen
as God foreknew that it would and that He foresees our sins
in such a way that our will still remains free and subject to
our power.

Chapter 4

9. Aug. What, then, is it that perplexes you? Unmindful,
possibly, of our conclusion in the first discussion, are you
going to deny that we are not forced to sin by anyone else,
whether he is superior, or inferior, or equal to us, but that
itis we who sin by our own will?

Ev. 1 dare not deny any of these points at all. But I still
have to admit that I do not see how these two notions are
not at variance, namely, God's foreknowledge of our sins
and the freedom of the will in sinning. We must admit that
God is just and has foreknowledge. But I would like to know
what kind of justice it is that makes God punish sins which
are committed of necessity, or how those things do not take
place necessarily which He foreknew would happen, or how
we can fail to ascribe to the Creator whatever occurs of
necessity in His creatures.

10. Aug. What basis do you have for your opinion that our
free will is at variance with God's foreknowledge? Is the
reason foreknowledge, or God's foreknowledge?

Ev. Chiefly because it is God's foreknowledge.

Aug. Well, then, if you foreknew that someone was going
to sin, would he have to sin?

Ev. Indeed he would, Unless I foreknew what is certain, I
would not have foreknowledge.

Aug. Therefore, what God foreknows must come about, not
because God foreknows it, but only because it is foreknown.
1f foreknowledge is not certain, there is no foreknowledge.

Ev. Y agree. But what are you driving at?
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 175

Aug. If I am not mistaken, it is the fact that you would
not necessarily be making a man sin because you foreknew
he was going to sin, Your foreknowledge would not itself
make him sin, though he is certainly going to sin; otherwise
you would not foreknow that it would happen. Therefore,
just as these two are not at variance, namely, your fore-
knowledge of what another will do and his freedom to do it,
so, though God does not force anyone to sin, yet He foresees
those who are going to sin by their own will.

11. Why, then, should a just God not punish sins which He
has not forced anyone to commit because of His foreknowl-
edge? Just as you do not compel past events to happen by
your memory of them, so God does not compel events of the
future to take place by His foreknowledge of them. Again, just
as you recall certain things that you have done, though you
do not do all the things you remember, so God foreknows all
things whereof He is the Cause, though He is not Himself
the Cause of all that He foreknows. He is not the cause of
evil deeds, but only their avenger.

You must see from this what that justice is which makes
God punish sins, since He does not perpetrate what He
knows is going to happen. For if He ought not to punish
sinners because He foreknows that they are going to sin,
then neither ought He to reward the righteous, since He
foresees equally well that they will do what is right. Let us
rather acknowledge that God’s foreknowledge requires that
nothing future be hidden from His view, while His justice
demands that sin, being a voluntary offense, should not go
unpunished by His judgment, since it was not necessitated
by His foreknowledge.

Chapter 5

12. Now your third question raised the problem of how
we can fail to ascribe to the Creator whatever takes place of
176 SAINT AUGUSTINE,

necessity in His creation. This problem should not readily
cast uncertainty on that precept of religious conduct which
obliges us to render thanks to the Creator. Even if He had
assigned us a lower place in His creation, we should in all
justice praise His bountiful goodness. Though weakened by
sin, our soul is yet more noble and perfect than if it were to
be changed into that light which we behold with our eyes.
And you are certainly aware how greatly God is praised for
the excelling quality of this light by souls, even when they
have become enslaved to the bodily senses. Consequently, the
fact itself that sinful souls incur blame should no longer
perplex you and make you say to yourself that it would
have been better had they never existed. They incur blame
when we compare them with themselves and see what they
would be if they had not willed to sin. Nevertheless, God
their Maker deserves the highest praise that man can give
Him, not only because He deals justly with them as sinners,
but also because He has so fashioned their souls that, even
when stained by sin, they are in no way surpassed in dignity
by that physical light for which He is nonetheless justly
praised.

13. Though you may not perhaps allege that it would have
been better if these souls had never existed, I would also
caution you against saying that they should have been created
differently. Whatever right reason suggests to you as more
perfect, you may be sure that God has already made it, for He
is the Creator of all things good. Whenever you suppose that
something better should have been made, because you are
unwilling to have anything less perfect exist, this is not right
reason but a want of understanding stemming from envy.
It is as if you should wish that the earth had not been made,
once you had gotten a view of the heavens. This attitude is

1 The two previous questions raised by Evodius at the beginning of the
former chapter inquired whether Cod can justly punish sins com-
mitted of necessity, and whether God's foreknowledge does not neces-
sitate the course of future events.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 177

entirely wrong. You might have reason to find fault if you
saw that the earth had been created while the heavens had
been passed over since you might allege that the earth should
have been made according to your idea of what the heavens
should be. But when you see that the heavens too have been
made according to the idea you had in mind for the earth,
though it is called the heavens rather than the earth, I do
not think you should ever begrudge existence to a less perfect
creature or to the earth since you have not been deprived of
something more perfect.

Again, there is such variety with respect to the parts of the
earth itself that no form of earthly beauty can occur to the
mind which has not been made somewhere over the whole
expanse of the earth by God, the Creator of all things. We
can pass so gradually from the most fertile and fairest tracts
of land to the most barren and unproductive through those in
between, that you do not dare to find fault with any part
except by comparing it with something better. In this way
you mount all the levels of excellence until you reach the
best kind of land, though you would not want this alone to
exist. But what a difference there is between the earthly uni-
verse and the heavens! In between are found moisture and
air, and from these four elements are formed all the many
various natures and kinds of things whose number, though
incalculable for us, is known to God, There may be some-
thing in nature which you do not conceive of in your mind,
but it is impossible that something not exist which you truly
conceive of in your mind. You cannot conceive of anything
better in the creation which has escaped the knowledge of the
Creator. It is really the nature of the soul to live in union
with the Divine Ideas? and it depends upon them whenever
it pronounces one thing to be better than another. If it sees

2 Augustine’s doctrine of illumination is intimately connected with his
notion of the Divine Ideas. For an interesting presentation of this
teaching in the light of its Platonic background, cf. De diversis
quaestionibus 83 q. 46.
178 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the truth, and understands it, it does so in the light of those
Ideas with which it is united. So the soul must believe that
God has made what his right reason tells him should have
been made, even though he fails to see it among the things
created, Even though a man were unable to see the heavens
with his eyes and yet could rightly conclude by his reason that
such a thing should be made, he would have to believe it
was made, though he could not see it with his eyes. Only in
the light of those Ideas, after which all things have been
made, could he see in his mind why something had to be
made. One cannot form a true conception of anything not
present in these Ideas anymore than he can find something
there which is not true.

14, Most men go astray on this point when, having per-
ceived more perfect realities with their mind, they try to find
them with their eyes in the wrong places. It is as if a
man with an intellectual grasp of perfect roundness should
become indignant at not finding it in a nut, supposing that
he had never seen anything round expect this fruit. So it is
with men who see perfectly well that a creature is better if,
while possessed of free will, it has nevertheless remained ever
united to God and has never sinned. When they look at the
sins of men, they are grieved, not simply because men do not
give up sinning, but because they have been created at all.
God, they tell us, should have created us so that we would
always will to enjoy His changeless truth but never will to sin.

These men should put an end to their complaining and
indignation. The fact that God has created men does not
force them to sin just because He has given them the power
to do so if they choose. Furthermore, there are angels who
have never sinned and who never will sin. If you are elated
by a creature that perseveres fully in its will not to sin, there
can be no doubt that you are right to prefer it to one that
sins, But just as you give this creature a preference in your
thinking, so has God the Creator given it preference in the
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 179

ordering of the universe. You must believe that a creature of
this kind exists in the higher realms and has its abode on
high in heaven. For if the Creator shows His goodness in
making a creature who He foresees is going to sin, He cannot
fail to show that same goodness in making one that He fore-
knew would not sin.

15. A creature so sublime as this finds its eternal happiness
in the endless enjoyment of its Creator, which it merits by
its unwavering will to hold fast to justice. The sinful creature,
too, has its proper place in the order of things. Through sin
it has lost its happiness, but not its power to recover happi-
ness. It is certainly better than the creature that is held
captive forever by its will to sin. It occupies a middle place
between the latter and the other which is ever steadfast in its
will for justice, because it can regain its high estate by humble
repentance. For God has not withheld His bountiful goodness
from making a creature which He foreknew would not only
sin, but would persist in its will to sin. Just as a stray horse is
better than a stone that does not go astray through a lack of
self-movement and sense perception, so a creature which sins
by its free will is more excellent than one that does not sin
because it is without free will. And just as I might praise a
wine as good in its own way and blame a man who became
drunk from this wine, nevertheless, I would set a higher value
on this man, whom I reproved and who is still drunk, than
I would on the wine which I praised and which made him
drunk. So too, the bodily creature should be duly praised
according to its rank, while they are deserving of blame who,
through the intemperant use of it, are turned away from the
perception of truth. Here again, despite their perversity and
a kind of intoxication, these men excel that bodily creature,
however praiseworthy in its own way, which has brought them
to ruin by intemperate desire; more excellent, not through
the demerit of their sins, but because of the abiding dignity
of their nature,
180 SAINT AUGUSTINE

16. It follows then, that any soul is of greater excellence
than any kind of body, and that the sinful soul is never
changed into a body, however great has been its fall. The
identity of the soul’s nature is not lost completely so that
it never loses its superiority over the body. In the world of
bodies, light holds the first place. Hence the least soul must
be ranked above the best body. It may happen that one
body is better than another which has a soul, but it is
never better than the soul itself.

Why then, should not God be praised, and why should His
unspeakable praises not be proclaimed far and wide? For He
has made souls destined to abide by the laws of justice, and
also others that He foresaw would sin, or even persevere in
their sins. Even souls like these are still more excellent than
creatures that cannot sin because they do not enjoy the
rational and free choice of the will. These, in turn, are still
better than the most resplendent light shed by any kind of
body, such as that which some men make the great mistake
of worshiping in place of the nature of the most-high God
Himself.

In the arrangement of bodily creatures, all the way from
the clusters of the stars down to the number of our hairs, the
beauty of these good things is achieved so progressively that
it would be utterly absurd to ask what this or that is doing
there, for all things have been created in their proper order.
How much more absurd it is to. speak this way about any
kind of soul at all which, no matter how far its beauty has
diminished or deteriorated, will, without a doubt, always
surpass in dignity any kind of bodily reality.

17. Reason and utility judge things in a different light.
Reason judges them in the light of truth and is guided by
sound judgment in subordinating lower things to those
higher. Utility tends, generally, from a habit of convenience
to value more highly things which reason shows to be of less

3 An allusion to the Manichaean identification of the sun with God. Cf.
C. Secundinum Manichaeum 1.20.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 181

value. Though reason ranks the heavenly bodies far above
those of earth, what worldly-minded man would not rather
have many stars missing in the heavens than to have a single
bush missing in his field, or a cow from his herd? Older
people either disregard entirely, or at least patiently await
for correction, judgments made by children who prefer the
death of any man, except a few whose love brings them joy,
to the death of a pet-sparrow; all the more so, when it is a
man who frightens them, while the sparrow sings well and is
attractive. Something the same is done by those whose intellec-
tual growth has enabled them to advance in wisdom whenever
they come upon men of poor judgment. Such praise God for
His lesser creatures because they are better suited to their
carnal senses while, in regard to His higher and nobler crea-
tures, they either give Him little or no praise, or even censure
Him or try to improve upon Him, or do not believe that He
is their Maker. Those wiser men should accustom themselves
either to disregard such judgments completely, if they can-
not correct them, or to endure them patiently until they can
correct them.

Chapter 6

18. In view of all this, that notion is far from true which
would have us impute the sins of a creature to the Creator,
even though those things have to take place which He fore-
knew would happen. You, for your part, assert that you
do not see how we can avoid imputing to God whatever
is bound to take place in His creature. I, on the contrary, see
no way, and I would deny outright that there is, or can be,
any way, to impute to God whatever must occur in His crea-
ture by reason of its sinful will.

Jf anyone says he would rather not exist than be unhappy,
I will reply: “You are not telling the truth, for you are un-
happy even now, yet you do not wish to die, for the simple
182 SAINT AUGUSTINE

reason that you wish to exist. Therefore, though you do not
wish to be unhappy, you still wish to exist. Be thankful,
then, for the fact that you will to exist so that you may be
rescued from what you do not want to be. You willingly exist,
and you are unwilling to exist unhappily. But if you are un-
grateful for your will to exist, it is only right that you be
compelled to be what you do not will to be. So I praise the
goodness of the Creator because you have what you wish, even
though you are ungrateful. I praise the justice of Him who
orders all things, because you have to suffer unwillingly for
your ingratitude.”

19. If he should say, “I do not wish to die, not because I
prefer an unhappy existence to no existence at all, but be-
cause I may be more unhappy after death,".I will reply:
“I£ this is unjust, you will not be more unhappy; but if just,
let us praise Him whose laws have decreed that this shall be
your state." If he says, "How am I to presume that I shall
not be unhappy," I will reply: "If your future state is in
your own power, either you will not be unhappy, or you
will be justly unhappy because you have not ruled over your
life justly. Or, again, if you have the will, but not the power,
to rule over your life, then, not being in your own power, you
are either in the power of no one or of someone else, un-
willingly or willingly. If you are in no one's power, you either
want it this way, or you do not. But you cannot be so un-
willingly unless some other force has overpowered you; yet
no force can overpower a man who is not in another's
power; and if you are not in another's power through your
own volition, we must conclude again that you are in your
own power. Again, either you are justly unhappy for not
having ruled over your life justly, or your future, whatever
it is, will be of your own choosing, so that you will still have
reason to thank the Creator for His goodness. But if you are
not in your own power, then he who has you in his power
is either stronger than you, or weaker. If he is weaker, you are
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 188

at fault and your unhappiness is just, because you can over-
come someone weaker if you want to. If, being weaker, you
are in the power of someone stronger, you simply have no
right to think that so rightful an order of things is unjust."
So I was perfectly right when I said, "If this is unjust, you
will not be more unhappy after death; but if just, let us
praise Him whose laws have decreed that this shall be your
state."

Chapter 7

20. But suppose he says, “It is because I am already exist-
ing that I prefer to be unhappy rather than not to exist
at all. But if I could have been consulted before I existed, I
would have chosen not to exist rather than to be unhappy.
The fact itself that I now fear not to exist though I am un-
happy is part of that very unhappiness which makes me will
what I ought not to will, for I ought rather to will not to
exist than to be unhappy. But now I admit that I really do
prefer unhappiness to nothingness. And the more unwise I am
to make such a choice, the unhappier it is, and it is all the
more unhappy, as I see more clearly that I should not have
made this choice."

I will reply: “Be all the more cautious not to blunder at
the very point where you fancy you are seeing the truth.
Now if you were happy, you would surely prefer to exist
rather than not to exist. Even now, unhappy as you are, you
nevertheless prefer to be unhappy rather than not to exist at
all, though you do not wish to be unhappy. Make every
effort, then, to understand how great a good existence itself
is, which is desired by the happy and unhappy alike. If you
weigh this matter well, you will see that you are unhappy
to the extent that you fail to draw near to the Being that
exists supremely, and that your failure to perceive this
184 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Supreme Existence is why you think it is better for someone
not to exist than to be unhappy. You will further realize that
you nevertheless wish to exist for the simple reason that you
owe your existence to Him who exists supremely.”

21. If, then, you would escape unhappiness, have a love for
this will to exist which is within you. In fact, the more you
will to exist, the closer you will come to Him who exists
supremely. And now give thanks that you do exist. Though
you are less perfect than those who are happy, you are yet
superior to beings which lack even the will to be happy; yet
many of these things are praised even by men who are un-
happy. Nevertheless, all things are rightly deserving of praise
by the very fact that they exist, since they are good inasmuch
as they exist.

The greater your love to exist, the more strongly will you
desire eternal life and you will long all the more to become
so disposed as to have no attachment to things temporal; for
our affections have been branded with the love of temporal
things and bear the stamp of them. Before coming to be,
temporal things do not exist; while existing, they are al-
ready passing away; once having passed away, they exist no
longer. Hence, while belonging to the future, they do not
yet exist, and once they have passed away, they no longer
exist. How, then, shall we take lasting possession of them,
since coming to exist is the same for them as to be going
out of existence? But the man who loves existence, looks
upon these things as good inasmuch as they exist, and loves
that which exists forever. And if his love of the former left
him inconstant, he will be made strong by his love of the
latter. If he wasted himself on the love of transitory things,
he will be made firm by the love of that which endures. He
will stand firm and come into the possession of that same
existence which he desired when he feared not to exist and
was unable to stand firm, being ensnared by the love of
things that pass away.
THE FREE CHOICE OF ‘THE WILL 185

You should, therefore, experience no regret, but rather
great elation, over the fact that you prefer even an unhappy
existence to the termination of an unhappy existence, since
you would not then be existing at all. If, to your initial will
to exist, you expand your existence more and more, you will
advance higher and become eminently fitted for that which
exists supremely. You will thus preserve yourself from any
kind of fall whereby the lowest thing in existence passes into
non-existence, dragging along with it the impetuosity of its
lovers. Hence he who would rather not exist for fear of
being unhappy must be unhappy, because it is impossible
for him not to exist. But the man who loves to exist more
than he detests existing unhappily should exclude what he
dislikes by enhancing that which he loves. When he begins
to enjoy perfect existence in keeping with his nature, he will
not be unhappy.

Chapter 8

22. See how absurd and inconsistent it is for anyone to
say that he would rather not exist than be unhappy. A man
who says he would rather have this than that is making a
choice of something, whereas non-existence is not something,
but nothing. It is logically impossible, therefore, for you to
make a choice when the object of your choice does not exist.
You assert that you really wish to exist, though you are un-
happy, but say that you should not wish this. What should
you will, then? I should will rather not to exist, you say.
If this is what you should wish, it is better, but, since that
cannot be better which does not exist, you should not, there-
fore, wish it at all. Furthermore, the natural insight that
prompts you not to will non-existence is more trustworthy
than the supposition which makes you think you should have
willed it. Again, when a man has attained what he rightly
chose as something to be desired, he necessarily becomes a
186 SAINT AUGUSTINE

better man, But he cannot become better if he is not going
to exist. No one, therefore, can logically choose not to exist.

Nor should we be unsettled by the judgment of those men
who have been driven by unhappiness to take their own lives.
Either they have sought to find refuge where they imagined
they would be better off, and this view, however they may
have come to it, is not opposed to our line of reasoning; or
if they thought they would no longer exist at all, we will be
far less unsettled by the illogical choice of men who make
“nothing” the object of their choice. If anyone chooses non-
existence, he is obviously choosing “nothing,” even though
he is unwilling to give this for an answer.

23. Allow me, however, to express my own view, if I can,
about this whole question. In my opinion, no one who takes
his life or in any way desires death, really feels certain that
he will not exist after death, even though he holds it some-
what as an opinion. Opinion is found in a man who exercises
his reason or belief in a matter that is either true or false,
while feeling derives its force either from custom or nature.
The possibility that opinion and feeling may be different is
readily seen from the fact that we frequently think we should
do one thing, while we find delight in doing something else.
Sometimes, too, feeling is more trustworthy than opinion,
when the latter arises from error and feeling springs from
nature, A sick man, for instance, is often enticed by cold
water which would be good for him to drink, though he be-
lieves it will hurt him if he drinks it. Sometimes opinion is
more trustworthy than feeling, as when a man takes the
word of medical science that cold water is bad for him, when
in fact it is, and yet he is delighted to drink it. At other times,
both are true, as when that which is beneficial is not only
thought to be so, but also gives delight. At other times, both
are wrong, as when something harmful is thought to be bene-
ficial and gives us endless delight. Usually, however, a right
opinion corrects the wrong custom, while a wrong opinion
‘THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 187

vitiates what is right by nature, for such is the power which
reason exercises in its rule and supremacy.

Consequently, when anyone is driven by unbearable hard-
ships to desire death wholeheartedly, in the belief that he
will not exist after death, he decides upon death and grasps
for it. Opinion leads him to entertain the false notion of a
complete extinction, whereas feeling suggests a natural desire
to be at rest. But the state of rest is not the same as nothing;
on the contrary, a thing at rest exists more perfectly than that
which is not at rest. In fact, restlessness makes us vacillate
in our affections so that one of them destroys the other, while
rest possesses a constancy which is uppermost in our mind
when we say of anything that it exists. Accordingly, every
desire on the part of a man’s will for death is directed, not
towards extinction after death, but towards rest. Though he
has the mistaken belief that he will not exist, he still has a
natural desire to be at rest, that is, to enjoy a more perfect
existence. Hence, just as no one can possibly find delight in
not existing, so it should never happen that anyone should
be ungrateful towards the goodness of his Creator for his

- existence.

Chapter 9

24. Suppose someone should say that it was not difficult
or laborious for an omnipotent God to see to it that every-
thing He made should so maintain its proper place that
no creature would come to the extremity of unhappiness; for,
being omnipotent, He could have done so, and, being good,
He could not be envious. I will say, in reply, that the orderly
arrangement of creatures extends all the way from the high-
est to the lowest according to certain just gradations in such
a way that only envy could prompt a man to say that a
creature should not exist, or that it should be different. For
if he wants it to be the same as something higher, then such
188 SAINT AUGUSTINE

a creature is already existing and possesses such excellence
that nothing more should be added, since it is perfect in its
kind. If he maintains that the lower creature should also
have this excellence, he either wants to add to the higher,
which is already perfect, and then he is wanting in modera-
tion and justice; or he wants to destroy the lower creature,
and then he becomes malicious and envious.

But if he asserts that it should not exist, he is still malicious
and envious, because, while opposed to its existence, he is still
compelled to praise it, even though it is of a lower rank, It
is as if he were to say that the moon should not exist. For he
must admit, or else be guilty of an absurd and obstinate
denial, that even the light of a lamp, though much less
luminous, has a beauty of its own, is a suitable ornament in
the darkness, is well suited for use at night, and, in all these
respects, is deserving of praise in its own small way. How,
then, can he rightly presume to say that the moon should
not exist when he realizes he would be open to ridicule if
he were to say that the lamp should not exist?

Now if he does not deny that the moon should exist, but
says that it should be like the sun, he fails to realize that he
is merely saying that there should be two suns but no moon.
Here he is doubly mistaken: he wants to add to the perfection
of the universe by desiring another sun and to detract from
its perfection by taking away the moon.

25. Here he may point out that he has no fault to find with
the moon, since it is not made unhappy by reason of its in-
ferior brightness, but that he is saddened over the plight of
souls, not because of their darkened condition, but on account
of their unhappiness. Let him note carefully that the moon’s
brightness has no more to do with unhappiness than does the
brightness of the sun with happiness, for although they are
heavenly bodies, they are bodies nevertheless with respect to
the kind of light that can be seen by our bodily eyes. Bodies,
as bodies, are capable neither of happiness nor of unhappi-
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 189

ness, though they may be the bodies of men who are happy
or unhappy.

But the analogy drawn from such luminous bodies can be
instructive. As you examine the difference among these bodies
and see that some are brighter, it is wrong for you to ask that
darker bodies be removed or be made equal to those that are
brighter. But if you make everything bear upon the perfec-
tion of the universe, the various grades of luminous bodies
will enable you to see all the more clearly the fact that they
all exist. You will further perceive that the perfection of the
universe requires that the presence of things more perfect
shall not entail the absence of those less perfect.

Consider in the same light the differences that also exist
among souls. Here, too, you will discover how the unhappi-
ness, which you deplore, contributes to the perfection of the
universe, since some souls merit unhappiness because of their
sinful will. And it is far from true to assert that God should
not have made such souls, when we owe him praise for having
also made other creatures far inferior to the condition of
unhappy souls.

26. But my opponent, apparently, has another objection
occasioned by his failure to grasp what has been said. Suppose,
he says, that even our unhappiness fills out the perfection of
the universe; then, in the event that we would always be
happy, something would be wanting to the perfection of the
universe. Thus, if the soul comes to an unhappy state only
through sin, then our sins are necessary for the perfection
of the universe, which God has made. How, then, is it just
for God to punish sin when, unless there was sin, His
creation could not be whole and entire?

Here is my answer. Neither sin nor unhappiness is neces-
sary for the perfection of the universe, but souls, taken simply
as souls, are necessary. They can sin if they will, and if they
do, they become unhappy. If their unhappiness were to con-
tinue once their sins were taken away, or if it were present
190 SAINT AUGUSTINE

before they sinned, one might rightly contend that the order
and government of the universe are defective. Again, if sins
are committed and there is no unhappiness, the order of
things is no less vitiated by injustice. When happiness is
found in those who do not sin, the universe is in perfect order.
Likewise, when unhappiness befalls those who sin, the uni-
verse remains no less perfect. The universe is always com-
plete and perfect by every kind of nature for the reason that
souls are not absent from it, whether it be those whose un-
happiness results from sin, or those whose happiness comes
from doing what is right. For sin and the punishment of
sin are not any sort of nature, but are states found in
nature, the former, voluntary, the latter, penal. The voluntary
state is a shameful one when sin is committed. Consequently,
a penal state is applied to the sinful state to assign the nature
a place which is fitting for its condition, and to compel it to
be in harmony with the beauty of the universe. In this way
the penalty for sin makes amends for the shamefulness of the
sin.

27. By sinning, therefore, the higher creature is punished
by the lower creatures, because the latter are of such lowly
condition that they can be embellished even by debased souls
and so be brought into harmony with the beauty of the uni-
verse. What is so great in a house as a man, and what so
mean and low as the sewer of the house? Yet, when a slave is
apprehended in some misdeed for which he deserves to be
made to clean the sewer, he enhances it by his own disgrace.
Both of these things, the slave’s disgrace and the cleaning of
the sewer, now combined and reduced to a distinctive kind of
unity, are blended and woven into the ordering of the house-
hold so that the beauty of their unity conforms to the har-
mony of the entire household. Yet, if the slave had not willed
to do wrong, some other provision for cleaning the household
necessities would have been available for the running of the
house.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 191

What is so low in all nature as an earthly body? Yet even
the sinful soul so embellishes this corruptible flesh as to
impart to it a beauty all its own and a life-giving movement.
Through sin, such a soul is unsuited for a heavenly abode but
is suited for an earthly habitation as a means of punishment.
Hence, no matter what choice the soul makes, the universe,
whose Creator and Ruler is God, remains ever beautiful
through the harmonious arrangement of its parts. When the
most excellent of souls dwell in the lowest of creatures, they
do not enhance them by their unhappiness, which they have
not, but by making the right use of them. But if sinful souls
were permitted to dwell in the higher regions, this would be
wrong, because they are not suited for things that they can-
not use properly and to which they add nothing by way of
embellishment.

28. Consequently, though this earthly orb is reckoned
among things corruptible, it still keeps intact, as far as it can,
the image of the higher realities of which it is continuously
pointing out to us certain examples and signs. If we see some
great and good man sacrificing his body to be burned from a
sense of duty, we do not call this a punishment for sin, but
a proof of courage and patience. And though this horrible
corruption is destroying his bodily members, we love him
more than if he were not undergoing such suffering, and we
actually marvel that the soul's nature is not altered by the
changes in the body. But when we see the body of a ruthless
robber destroyed in a similar way as a punishment, we ap-
prove this orderly process of the law. Both men, then, enhance
such torments, but the first does so on the merit of his virtue,
the other, by the demerit of his sin. If, after his exposure to
the flames, or even beforehand, we should see the good man
transformed into a state suited for a heavenly abode and
transported to the stars, we would certainly rejoice. But if,
whether before or after his punishment, we should see the
wicked thief raised to an everlasting place of honor, despite
192 SAINT AUGUSTINE,

the persistence of his evil will, who of us would not take
umbrage at this? Hence, both can enhance the dignity of the
lower creation, but only one can do so for the higher.

This reminds us to take note that the first man enhanced
the mortal character of our flesh as a suitable punishment for
sin, and that our Lord also enhanced it so that in His mercy
He might free us from sin. The just man could have a mortal
body and, if he persevered in justice, could attain the im-
mortality of the saints, which is impossible for the wicked
man so long as he remains wicked. I refer to the immortality
proper to heaven and to the angels; not to those angels about
whom the Apostle says: "Know you not that we will judge the
angels," but to those of whom the Lord says: "For they will
be equal to the angels of God."? Men, whose vainglory
prompts them to desire equality with the angels, do not will
to be equal to the angels but to have the angels equal to
them.’ If they persist in this will, their punishment will be
equal to that of the angels who love their own power more
than that of Almighty God. Since these have not sought God
through the lowly entrance of humility, which the Lord
Jesus Christ has shown us in His own life, and have been
unforgiving and proud during life, they will be placed on His
left side where He will say to them: “Depart into everlasting
fire which was prepared for the devil and his angels.’

Chapter 10

29. Sins spring from two sources, our own thoughts and
the persuasion of others, and I believe that the Prophet was
referring to these when he said: "From my hidden sins

11 Cor. 63.

2 Luke 20.36.

3 Here I have adopted the Maurist reading . . . non ideo volunt esse
angelis, sed angelos sibi, rather than that of Professor Green, which
omits angelos.

4 Matt. 2541.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 193

cleanse me, O Lord, and from the sins of others spare thy
servant.”! Both sources, of course, are voluntary. Just as a
person who sins by thought does not do so against his will, so
when he consents to another's evil persuasion, he does so only
by his will. Yet, to sin not only through one's own thoughts
without being persuaded to do so by another, but also to
persuade someone else by envy or deceit to sin, is a more
grievous offense than being induced to sin by the persuasion
of another. Accordingly, the Lord's justice is vindicated by
His punishing both kinds of sin.

This issue, too, was weighed on the scales of justice, namely,
that the devil should not be denied his power over men
whom his evil persuasion had made subject to him. It would
have been unfair for the devil not to rule over one whom he
had made his captive. It is unthinkable that the perfect
justice of the supreme and true God, which encompasses all
things, should fail to impose order even upon the ruin
suffered by sinners.

But since man had sinned less grievously than the devil,
he was enabled to recover salvation by the very fact that he
was given in bondage, even in his mortal flesh, to the prince
of this world, namely, the lowest and mortal region of the
universe, in bondage, that is, to the prince of all sinners and
the ruler of death. Conscious now of his mortal condition,
living in dread of injury and destruction from the meanest
and most contemptible beasts, even the smallest of them, in-
secure for his future, man grew accustomed to check sinful
delights, and, most of all, to curb pride, which led to his
fall and which is the one vice that rejects the healing remedy
of mercy. What indeed stands so much in need of mercy as an
unhappy man, and what is so undeserving of mercy as the
unhappy man who is proud?

30. So it has come to pass that the Word of God, through
whom all things have been made and who is the source of

1 Ps. 18.13-14
194 SAINT AUGUSTINE

happiness in the Angels, has reached out in His mercy even
to our misery, and has become flesh and has dwelt among us.
And though not yet equal to the Angels, man could thus eat
the Bread of Angels if the Bread of Angels should Himself
deign to become equal with men. Nor has His coming down
to us made Him abandon the Angels, but He is wholly
present at the same time to them and to us. He nourishes the
Angels within by His divinity, and teaches us by outward
signs through the human nature that is ours. By faith He
prepares those whom He will nourish by the vision of His
countenance, as He does for the Angels.

Rational creatures find their most perfect nourishment, so
to speak, in this Word. And, though the human soul is
rational, it was held captive by the bonds of death as a penalty
for sin, debased to the point that it must toil to grasp things
invisible by inferences drawn from things that are visible.
This Food of rational creatures has been made visible to our
eyes, not by any change in His nature, but by putting on our
nature, that He may recall us from the pursuit of visible
things to His divine nature which is invisible to our eyes.
In this way the soul discovers the outward lowliness of Him
whom it had inwardly abandoned in its pride, and by imitat-
ing the visible example of His humility, the soul will return to
the heights of things invisible.

31. Having put on man’s nature, God’s Word and only Son
has also brought under man’s power the devil, whom He has
ever held, and will ever hold, under the power of His law. He
has wrested nothing from the devil by tyrannical force but
has subdued him by the law of justice. After the woman had
been deceived and man had fallen because of the woman, the
devil laid claim to the entire offspring of the first man, as to
sinners subject to the law of death. He did so from a malicious
desire to harm them, though in accordance with strict justice.
The devil’s power prevailed until he put to death the Just
One, in whom he could show nothing deserving of death,
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 195

not only because, though guiltless, He was slain, but also
because He was born free from the influence of lust. The
devil had subjected his captives to lust that he might make
his own whatever was born of it, as fruit from his own tree,
motivated of course by covetousness, but not without a just
title of ownership.

It is, then, a matter of strict justice that the devil should
be forced to set free all those who believe in Him whom
he put to death so unjustly. Thus, by suffering death for a
time, these discharge their debt, and, by living for all eternity,
they live in Him who paid a debt for them, which He Himself
did not owe. But the devil could in justice keep as his com-
panions in eternal damnation those whom he had persuaded
to remain obstinate in their unbelief. Thus man, whom the
devil had subdued, not forcibly but by persuasion, was not
wrested forcibly from the devil. Besides, having justly suffered
the further humiliation of having to serve the devil to whom
he had consented in doing evil, man was justly set free by
Him to whom he consented in doing good, because, in con-
senting to evil, man had sinned less grievously than the devil
had done by his evil suggestion.

Chapter 11

82. God therefore made all creatures, not only those that
would persevere in virtue and justice, but also those that
would sin. He did not make them to sin, but to be an adorn-
ment of the universe, whether they willed to sin or not. If
there were no souls to occupy the highest place in the order
of the created universe, such that should they will to sin, the
universe would be undermined and ruined, something of
great importance would be lacking in the creation; for there
would be lacking that very thing whose absence would dis-
turb the stability and orderly arrangement of the universe.
196 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Such are the excellent, holy, and sublime creatures compris-
ing the Powers of heaven and beyond, over whom God alone
rules, and to whom the whole world has been made subject.
Without the exact and perfect discharge of their duties by
such creatures, it would be impossible for the world to exist.
Again, if there were no souls that would choose either to
sin or not to sin, the order in the universe would not be
impaired, though something of great importance would thus
be lacking. Rational souls do in fact exist, unequal, of course,
in function to higher souls, but equal to them in nature. And
there are many classes of things made by the Most High God,
which, though still lower than these, are yet worthy of praise.

33. The nature of those exercising a higher function is
such that the order of the universe would suffer not only if
this nature were non-existent but also if it were to sin. The
nature of souls having lower functions is such that the uni-
verse would be less perfect only if they did not exist, but
not if they were to sin. Upon the former nature there has
been conferred the power to maintain all things in order as
its own special function and one which cannot possibly be
lacking in the created order. It is not because it has received
this function that it perseveres in its good will; rather, it
has received this function because God, who assigned it, fore-
saw that it would so persevere. It does not, however, maintain
all things in order by its own authority, but by fidelity to His
authority and the devout discharge of His commandments
"from whom and through whom and in whom all things have
been made.”

To the former there has also been granted the exalted power
to maintain all things in order, provided, of course, it was
sinless, though it does not possess this power exclusively but
only in conjunction with the latter, since it was foreknown
that it would sin. Spiritual natures can be joined together
and separated without any increase or decrease in bulk. Con-

1 Cf. Rom. 11.36
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 197

sequently, the task of the higher would not be made easier by
their union with the lower nor rendered more difficult if the
lower should desert its function because of sin. Though
spiritual creatures may possess their individual bodies, they
cannot be joined or separated by reason of place or physical
bulk but only by a sameness or difference in their inclinations.

34. When the soul has been assigned its rightful place, sub-
sequent to its sinning, among the lower and mortal bodies,
it does not rule over its own body with complete freedom but
only according as the laws of the universe permit. Neverthe-
less, such a soul is not thereby made inferior to a heavenly
body to which even earthly bodies have been made sub-
ordinate. Certainly, the tattered clothing of a condemned
slave is inferior to that worn by a well-deserving slave who is
highly esteemed by his master. But the slave himself, because
he is a man, is better than any kind of costly attire. The
higher spiritual nature, then, residing in a heavenly body,
adheres to God, and, through its angelic power, is able to
lend adornment even to earthly bodies and to rule them
according to the command of Him whose will it beholds in
some ineffable manner. The lesser spiritual nature, weighed
down by a mortal body, can scarcely exercise inner control
over the very body which oppresses it, and yet it lends it as
much adornment as possible. Upon other bodies that surround
it from without, it exercises an outward but weaker influence
so far as is possible.

Chapter 12

35. We may thus infer that, even had the spiritual nature
never willed to sin, nothing in the way of suitable adorn-
ment would have been lacking to the lowest level of corporeal
creation. For what is capable of ruling the whole, can
also rule over a part, though that which can do something
less, cannot necessarily accomplish something greater. The
198 SAINT AUGUSTINE

fully competent physician can also heal a bodily sore effec-
tively, but it does not necessarily follow that a man who
is useful in treating a sore can cure every kind of human
disorder. Indeed, if we consider the true force of our reason-
ing which makes it perfectly clear that there had to exist a
creature that never sinned and never will sin, that same
reasoning will show us that such a creature refrains from sin
by its free will and is free from sin, not by compulsion, but of
its own accord. However, if it were to sin—though it has not
done so, just as God foreknew—nevertheless, if it were to sin,
the indescribable force of God’s power would suffice to rule
this universe, so that by assigning all things their due and
proper place, He permits nothing shameful or unbecoming
to exist throughout His entire domain. Even without the
agency of any powers created for this very purpose, and even
if all the angelic natures had sinfully defected from His com-
mands, God would rule over all things by His own power in
the best and most suitable way possible. Nor would He on
this account be harboring any ill-will towards the existence of
spiritual creatures, since His bountiful goodness has also
created bodily creatures which are far inferior to spiritual
creatures, even when these latter sin. Hence, anyone who gazes
thoughtfully upon the heavens and the earth and things
visible, all arranged in classes according to their proper form
and mode of being, will believe that God alone is their Maker
and acknowledge that He deserves praise beyond the power
of words to express. On the other hand, if there is no better
plan for ordering the universe than that the power of angels
should govern all things in virtue of their natural excellence
and the good dispositions of their will, then, even if all the
angels were to sin, they would not have left the Creator of
angels without the resources to rule over His own domains.
God's goodness would not fail through any kind of weariness
nor would His Omnipotence be found wanting in the face of
difficulty to create other angels and assign them to the posi-
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 199

tions which the others had deserted through sin. And if spiri-
tual natures were to suffer just condemnation, they could
not, however numerous they might be, obstruct the order of
things which makes just and appropriate provision for those
who deserve condemnation. Wherever, therefore, we direct
our attention, we find that God deserves praise far beyond the
power of language to express, for He is the perfect Creator
and most just Ruler of all natures.

36. Finally, let us leave the contemplation of this beauty
of the universe to those who can do so through God's gift, and
let us not try to lead men by means of words to the contempla-
tion of things ineffable. And yet, on account of certain
loquacious men, who are either fickle or deceitful! let us
examine this important question as briefly as possible.

Chapter 18

Every nature capable of becoming less good is a good
nature, and every nature becomes less good when it is cor-
rupted. Now, either corruption does no harm to a nature and
it is not corrupted, or, if the nature is corrupted, it suffers
harm from such corruption. If it suffers harm, corruption
destroys something of its goodness and makes it less good. If
corruption deprives it entirely of all its good, then what re-
mains will no longer be capable of corruption because there
will be no good to be lost by further corruption; for that is
not corrupted which can suffer no harm from corruption.
Again, a nature which does not undergo corruption is in-
corruptible. Consequently, there will be a nature which cor-
ruption has made incorruptible, which is altogether absurd.

Therefore, it is perfectly true to assert that every nature,
insofar as it is a nature, is good. For, if it is incorruptible,
it is better than a corruptible nature, while, if it is corrupti-

1 A reference to the Manichaeans.
200 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ble, it is undoubtedly good, since it becomes less good when
undergoing corruption. Now every nature is either corruptible
or incorruptible, and therefore every nature is good. I use
the term “nature” to indicate what is also commonly called
“substance.” Hence every substance is either God or from
God, since every good is either God or from God.

37. Now that we have firmly settled upon these principles
as a kind of point of departure for our reasoning, give your
attention to what I am going to say. Every rational creature
endowed with free choice of the will is undoubtedly worthy
of praise, provided it perseveres in its enjoyment of the
highest and changeless good; and every nature which en-
deavors so to persevere is also worthy of praise. On the other
hand, every nature that fails to persevere in this good and is
unwilling ‘to exert itself to this end is blameworthy to the
extent that it fails to abide in the good and makes no effort
to do so.

1f, therefore, a created rational nature receives praise, then
no one can doubt that He who created it is worthy of
praise; and if it is blameworthy, no one can doubt that its
Maker receives praise even when it is an object of reproach.
For when we blame it for not having the will to enjoy the
highest and changeless good, namely, the Creator, we are
surely rendering praise to God. How great a good, then, is
God, the Creator of all things! How deserving He is of praise
and honor beyond the power of our words or thoughts to
express! For we can neither be praised nor blamed without
giving Him praise. We cannot be blamed for not abiding
in Him unless this is our greatest, highest, and principal good.
And why is this so, if not because God's goodness is ineffable?
What justification can we find in our sins for blaming God
when it is impossible to blame our sins without giving praise
to God?

38. Then again, when we blame these things themselves,
is it not their vice alone that is blamed? Moreover, you can-
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 201

not blame the vice in a thing without praising its nature.
Either what you blame is natural to the thing and not a vice
at all, and then it is you that should be corrected, rather than
what you are wrongly blaming, so you will know how to
blame the right things; or, if it is a vice that may be rightly
blamed, it must also be against nature. All vice, precisely be-
cause it is vice, is against nature. If it does not harm a nature,
it is not vice; if it is a vice because it harms nature, it is a
vice because it is against nature. But if a nature is corrupted
by another's vice, and not by its own, it is unjust to blame it,
and we must ask whether that nature whose vice could cor-
rupt another nature does not itself suffer corruption by its
own vice. What does it mean for a thing to be vitiated, except
that it is corrupted by vice?

Furthermore, a nature that is not vitiated is free from
vice, whereas that which corrupts another nature by its vice
is certainly possessed of vice. Hence, a nature that can corrupt
another with its vice is itself first vitiated and already cor-
rupted. We may thus conclude that all vice is against nature,
even against the very nature of the thing that has it. Ac-
cordingly, since it is only the vice in a thing that is blamed,
and, since something is a vice because it is against the
nature that has it, we cannot properly blame the vice in a
thing without praising its nature. You are rightly displeased
with the vice only because it vitiates something in the nature
that pleases you.

Chapter 14

39. We must see whether it is also true to say that a
nature is corrupted by the vice of another when it has no
vice of its own. If a nature possessed of vice approaches
another nature in order to corrupt it and finds nothing in
it capable of corruption, it does not corrupt it. But if it does
find something corruptible, it joins forces with the vice of
202 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the other to bring about its corruption. If a stronger nature
is unwilling, it cannot be corrupted by a weaker, but if it
is willing to be corrupted, its corruption starts with its
own vice rather than with the other's. In the same way, a
nature cannot be corrupted by one its equal if it is unwilling.
Any nature in a vicious condition that accosts one free from
vice in order to corrupt it, comes to it, by that very fact,
not as its equal, but as one already weaker by reason of its
vice.

But if a stronger nature corrupts one that is weaker, this
comes about either because there is vice in both, if it comes
from the evil desires of both, or it results from the vice of the
stronger when its nature is of such excellence that, even
though vitiated, it ranks above the lower nature that it cor-
rupts. How could anyone rightly blame the fruits of the earth
simply because men do not put them to good use when such
men are already corrupted by their own vice and, in turn,
corrupt these fruits by misusing them for sinful pleasure? Yet,
only a fool could doubt that, even in its vitiated state, human
nature is more excellent and stronger than any kind of fruit,
even when it is unspoiled.

40. It is possible for a stronger nature to corrupt a weaker
one and to do so without any vice on either part, if by vice
we mean that which is blameworthy. Who, for instance, would
dare to blame a frugal man who looked for nothing more in
these fruits than natural replenishment, or who would blame
the fruits themselves because they are corrupted by his use
of them for food? In ordinary usage this is not called cor-
ruption since, most of the time, the term usually denotes a
vice.

We can easily observe this fact too, that when a stronger
nature corrupts one weaker, it does not do this to satisfy its
own needs, as, for example, when it punishes a fault according
to the demands of justice. It is with such a rule in mind that
the Apostle says: “If any man corrupt the temple of God, God
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 203

will corrupt him.”! Or, again, such corruption is seen in the
arrangement of changeable things which give way to one
another according to laws eminently designed for the gov-
ernment of the universe according to the natural capacity of
each part. If the sun’s brightness should injure someone whose
eyes are too weak by nature to withstand its light, we should
not imagine that the sun causes this alteration in the eyes to
supply a deficiency in its own light or through any vice on
its part, In any case, the eyes themselves should not be blamed
because they obeyed their owner’s command to look into the
light or because they were injured by yielding to the light
itself,

Consequently, of all the forms of corruption, only that
can be rightly blamed which involves vice. The others should
either not even be called corruption, or, in any case, they
cannot possibly be blameworthy since they do not involve
vice. Indeed, the word “blame” (vituperatio) is thought to be
derived from vitium and paratum, meaning something pre-
pared exclusively for vice, namely, that which is properly due
to vice.

41. Now, as I started to say, a vice is evil simply because
it is against the nature itself that has it. Hence it is clear
that the very thing whose vice is being blamed is itself de-
serving of praise because of its nature, and that we must
therefore acknowledge that, in blaming their vices, we are
bestowing praise upon the natures, upon those natures, that
is, whose vices are being blamed. Since vice is opposed to a
thing’s nature, its malice increases as the integrity of the
nature decreases. Whenever, therefore, you blame the vice,
you really praise the thing that you would want to see pos-
sessed of its integrity. And where is this integrity found, except
in the nature? A nature that is perfect not only deserves no
blame, but also merits praise according to the excellence of
its nature, You call what is wanting to the natural perfection

1 1 Cor.

.17.
204 SAINT AUGUSTINE

of a thing a vice, thereby showing plainly enough that you
are pleased with the nature and would like to see it perfect,
which is why you blame its imperfection.

Chapter 15

42. If, then, the beauty and dignity of natures infected with
vice are enhanced even when we blame their vices, how
much more should God, the Creator of all natures, be praised
for such natures, even in their vitiated condition! Though
they owe their natures to Him, they become vitiated to the
extent that they depart from the design by which God has
made them. Moreover, they are blameworthy to the extent
that, in recognizing the design wherein they were fashioned,
we blame them because we do not find this in them. And if
this very design, by which all things have been made, namely,
the supreme and changeless Wisdom of God, is something
which truly and supremely exists, as indeed it does, then you
must see in what direction a thing is tending which departs
from this design. But unless it were voluntary, this defect
would not be blameworthy. Consider, if you will, whether it
would be right for you to blame something which exists the
way it should exist. I do not think so; rather you would blame
that which is not what it should be. No one is indebted for
something he has not received. And to whom is one indebted,
except to him from whom he has received that which makes
him a debtor? Even payments made in the form of a bequest
are made for him who made the bequest. And payment made
in favor of the rightful heirs of creditors is really paid to the
creditors who have been succeeded by their rightful heirs.
Otherwise, this should not be called a payment, but a transfer
or donation, or whatever else such transactions are called.

Hence, it would be utterly absurd of us to assert that
temporal things should not perish. Their status in the order
of nature is such that, unless they pass out of existence,
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 205

things future could not succeed those that are past, and the
beauty of the ages could not reach its full and natural per-
fection. They act according to the efficacy they have received
and, to this extent, make return to Him to whom they are
indebted for whatever existence they have. Anyone who
laments the passing of these things should reflect on his own
words, at least on those which voice his complaint, to see if
his complaint is just and based upon prudence. If he is
enamored by some of his words because of their sound and
is unwilling to have them pass away and give place to the
rest so that his whole discourse can be framed by the succes-
sion of his words, we will judge that he is afflicted with a
strange kind of insanity.

43. No one therefore can rightly blame those things for
their failure to continue; they pass away because they received
no further existence, so that all things may run their course
according to their appointed times, And no one can say that
something should have remained in existence when it could
not exceed the limits assigned to it.

Whether they sin or not, it is in rational creatures that
the beauty of the universe achieves its final and most fitting
perfection. Now they either do not sin [when they complain
about the transitory nature of things], which would be a per-
fectly absurd thing to say, since one at least commits sin by
condemning what is no sin; or they deserve no blame for their
sin, which is just as absurd, for then we shall actually begin
to praise evil deeds and the whole direction of man's think-
ing will be thrown into confusion and cause an upheaval in
life; or an action will be blamed which was done as it should
have been done, and this will give rise to abominable folly,
or, to put it more mildly, to a most unfortunate kind of
error; or, if we are constrained, as we are, by the truth of our
reasoning to blame sins, and to blame rightly whatever does
not exist as it should, then ask what the sinful nature owes
and you will find that it owes the debt of good deeds; ask
206 SAINT AUGUSTINE

to whom it owes this debt and you will find that it is God.
It is from Him that the soul has received the power to act
tightly when it so wills, and also from Him that it is made
unhappy if it fails to act rightly, and made happy if it does
act rightly.

44, Since no one prevails over the laws of the Almighty
Creator, the soul may not fail to pay what it owes. It does so
either by making good use of what it has received, or by
forfeiting what it was unwilling to use rightly. Accordingly,
if it does not pay with just acts, it will pay by suffering un-
happiness, because the term “debt” holds for both cases. We
might also express this by saying that if the soul does not pay
by doing what it ought, it will pay by suffering what it ought.
There is, however, no temporal interval between these two.
It is not as though the soul fails in its duty at one time and
suffers its due punishment at another. The beauty of the uni-
verse may not be disfigured even for an instant by having the
ugliness of sin without the beauty of a just punishment. What-
ever is punished now in utmost secrecy is reserved to the
future judgment for its manifestation and painful experience
of unhappiness. Just as one who is not awake is sleeping, so
too, the man who fails to act as he ought experiences at once
the suffering he deserves, because the happiness that comes
from justice is so great that one cannot depart from it except
to embark upon unhappiness. In all cases of defection, things
suffering defection have either not received further existence,
and there is no fault—just as even while they were existing,
there was no fault since they did not receive further existence
—or else they are unwilling to be what they were given the
power to be, if they had so willed. And since what they re-
ceived is something good, they are guilty if they fail to will it.

Chapter 16

45. God, however, is a debtor to no one since He con-
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 207

fers everything gratuitously. And if anyone should say that
something is due him from God because of his merits, his
existence, at least, is something not owed him, for nothing
was owed him when he did not exist. Besides, what merit is
there in turning to Him from whom you have your existence,
that you may enjoy a more perfect existence from Him who
has given you your existence? What, then, have you given
God in advance that you can demand as a debt? When you
refuse to turn to Him, He is not the loser, but you yourself.
Without Him you would be nothing, and He is so much the
cause of your existence that, unless you make due acknowledg-
ment to Him for your existence by turning to Him, you will
not, it is true, be non-existent, but you will be unhappy all

the same.

All things, therefore, owe to Him, first of all, such existence
as they have by their natures; next whatever further perfec-
tion they can achieve, if they so will, according to the will
they have received, and according to what it is their duty to
become, and for all that they ought to be. No one is at fault
for what he has not received, but he is justly at fault for not
doing as he ought. Now he has an obligation to do so if he
has received free will and all the power that is needed.

46. When anyone does not act as he ought, this, far from
being a fault on the part of the Creator, even redounds to
His praise, because such a one suffers due punishment. The
very fact that one is blamed for not doing what he ought to
do, is simply to give praise to God to whom he owes a debt.
If you receive praise for seeing what you are obliged to do,
though you can only see this in Him who is the changeless
Truth, how much more should He be praised who has both
laid a command upon your will and has given you the power
to fulfill it, and has not allowed your refusal to go un-
punished?

If everyone must render what he has received, and if man
has been so made that he sins of necessity, then it is his duty
208 SAINT AUGUSTINE

to sin. Therefore, whenever he sins, he is doing what he
ought to do. If it is wicked to make such an assertion, then
no one is forced by his nature to sin! Neither is he forced
to sin by another's nature, for no one sins so long as what
happens to him is against his will. If he suffers justly, his
sin is not in suffering against his will, but in his having
sinned by such willful action that he now suffers a just punish-
ment against his will. If he suffers unjustly, how does he sin?
For there is no sin in suffering something unjustly, but rather
in perpetrating some unjust action. But if no one is forced to
sin, either by his own nature or by someone else's, it follows
that he sins by his own will.

If you wish to impute the sin to the Creator, you will
exonerate the sinner who has done nothing that falls outside
the designs of the Creator. But if it is just to defend the
sinner, he has not sinned, and there is nothing to impute to
the Creator. Let us, therefore, praise the Creator, whether the
sinner can be defended or not. If he is justly defended, he is
not a sinner; praise God, then. But if he cannot be defended,
he is a sinner insofar as he turns away from the Creator. So
give praise to the Creator. Accordingly, I do not see how we
can impute our sins to God, our Creator, and I declare that
there is no way possible, and that none in fact exists. I do
find that He is deserving of praise even in these very sins,
not merely because He punishes them, but also because they
are committed at the very moment that one departs from
His truth.

Ev. Y am perfectly willing to accept these points and I give
them my approval. And I agree it is perfectly true that it
is altogether impossible to impute our sins rightly to our
Creator.

Chapter 17

47. But I would still like to know, if this is possible, why
1 Also appropriated by Pelagius against Augustine's teaching on grace.

THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 209

one nature does not sin, which God foreknew would not
sin, and why another does sin, which He foresaw was going
to sin. I am no longer of the opinion that, because of God's
foreknowledge, the one is forced to sin while the other is not
forced to sin. But unless there were some cause for it, rational
creatures would not be divided into some that never sin,
others that continuously sin, and others, in between, as it
were, that sometimes sin and at other times turn to doing
what is right. What is the cause for the separation into these
three groups? Now I do not want you to reply that it is the
will, for I am looking for the cause of the will itself. Since they
all have the same nature, there must be some cause why one
never wills to sin, why another always wills to sin, and why
another wills to sin at one time but not at another. This
much alone seems clear to me, namely, that there has to be
a cause for this threefold division of the human will, but
what it is, I do not know.

48. Aug. Since the will is the cause of sin, and you are look-
ing for the cause of the will itself, supposing I were to find
this, will you not be looking for the cause of this cause which
I have found? What limit will there be to our inquiry, and
where will our investigation and discussion end, since there
is no need to carry your inquiry beyond the root of the matter?
Beware of supposing that anything could possibly be truer
than the saying that “avarice is the root of all evil,”! namely,
the desire for more than is sufficient. Sufficiency is measured
by what each nature requires for its preservation according
to its class. The word avarice, in Greek, philarguria, is not
to be understood merely in terms of silver and coins, from
which the Greek term is more properly derived, since, among
the ancients, coins were made from silver or, as was more
commonly the case, from a silver alloy, but must be under-
stood in regard to everything that is desired immoderately
whenever anyone simply wants more than is sufficient. Such

1 1 Tim. 6.10.
210 SAINT AUGUSTINE

avarice is cupidity, and cupidity is a perverse will. A perverse
will, therefore, is the cause of all evil. If this were natural, it
would certainly preserve the nature and not be destructive
of it, and consequently it would not be a perverse will. Hence
the conclusion that the root of all evil is not in accord with
nature, which is a sufficient rejoinder against those who
want to reproach nature. But if you are looking for the cause
of this root, how will it be the root of all evil? For there
will be a cause of this cause and, as I said, when you find it,
you will look for what caused it and there will be no end to
our inquiry.

49. But what could possibly come before the will to be its
cause? Either the will is itself the cause, and there will be no
regress from this root of the will, or it is not the will, and
the will is without sin. Consequently, either the will itself
is ultimately the cause of sin, or the ultimate cause of sin is
without sin. Sin can be justly imputed to no one but a
sinner, and can therefore only be justly imputed to one who
wills it? But I fail to see why you wish to look for some-
thing else. Finally, whatever is the cause of the will is cer-
tainly either just or unjust. If just, whoever obeys it will
not be sinning; if unjust, it must not be obeyed and one will
not commit sin.

Chapter 18

50. Or is there perhaps some violent cause that compels
one against his will? Now, must we go on repeating the same
things over and over again? Recall the previous points
which we mentioned at length concerning sin and free will.
If it is difficult to commit them all to memory, keep this brief
point in mind. Whatever the cause of the will, if a man is
unable to resist, there is no sin in his yielding to it; if he
can resist, he must not yield to it and there will be no sin.
Or does it perhaps deceive a man caught off his guard? Then

2 Another passage directed by Pelagius against Augustine.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 211

let him take care not to be deceived. Or is the deception so
powerful that it is simply impossible to be on one’s guard
against it? If this is the case, there is no sin, for how can
anyone sin where he cannot possibly be on his guard? But
sins are committed, and therefore it is possible to be on one’s
guard.

51. And yet there are things done even from ignorance
which are condemned and judged as deserving of correction,
as we read on the authority of the Sacred Writers. For ex-
ample, the Apostle says: “I obtained mercy, because I acted
in ignorance"! And the Prophet says: "Remember not the
deeds of my youth and of my ignorance."? Actions performed
of necessity are blameworthy when a man has the will to do
right and cannot do so. Hence the words of the Apostle:
"For the good which I will, I do not; but the evil which I
will not, I do"; and, "To will is present with me, but to
accomplish that which is good, I find not"; and, “The flesh
lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. For
these things are contrary one to another, so that you do not
what things you will" But these things are all the lot of
men who spring from the time of man's condemnation to
death; for if this is not a punishment for man, but is some-
thing natural, then there is no sin. If man does not depart
from the natural condition in which he was made, which can-
not be improved upon, then, in doing these things, he is only
acting as he should. But if man were good, he would be in a
different condition. But because he exists the way he does, he
is not good now and does not have it in his power to become
good, either because he does not see what kind of man he
ought to be, or, though seeing this, he is unable to become
what he sees he ought to be. Can there be any doubt that this
is a punishment?

Now every punishment, if just, is a punishment for sin,

1 1 Tim. 1.13.
2 Ps. 247.

3 Rom. 7.19, 18.
4 Gal. 5.17.
212 SAINT AUGUSTINE

and is called a penalty. But if the punishment is unjust, and
there is no doubt that it is a punishment, then it has been
inflicted on man by some ruler who is unjust. Besides, since
only a fool would doubt the omnipotence and justice of God,
this is a just penalty and is inflicted as punishment for some
kind of sin, For no unjust ruler could ever steal man from
God, unknown to Him, or wrest him from God against his will,
as if God were too weak and were so subject to threats or
violence that this ruler might afflict man with unjust punish-
ment. It remains, then, that this is a just punishment springing
from man’s condemnation.

52. We must not be surprised that man in his ignorance
does not enjoy the free choice of will to choose the right thing
to do or, though aware of what is right and with a will to
do it, that he is unable to accomplish it against the opposition
of carnal habits which have somehow become ingrown in
nature by the vehemence present in the act of human genera-
tion. It is a perfectly just penalty for sin that man should
forfeit what he would not put to good use when he could
easily do so, if he were willing. That is to say, a man who
fails to do what he knows is right, and a man who was
unwilling to do what was right when he could, forfeits the
power to do so when he wants to have it.

These two punishments, ignorance and difficulty, are truly
present in every soul that sins. Through ignorance, the soul
is tainted with error; through difficulty, it suffers anguish.
But to accept falsity for truth, so as to err unwillingly, and
to be unable to refrain from lustful acts through the resistance
of carnal habits, these are not of man’s nature as he originally
existed, but are a punishment of man inflicted after his con-
demnation. When we speak of the will's freedom to do what is
right, we are speaking, of course, of that freedom with which
man was created.>
5 In the Retractations (1.9.5), Augustine reproduces section 51 entire

and the second paragraph of section 52 to show how he had antici-
pated, as it were, certain Pelagian objections to his teaching on grace.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 218

Chapter 19

53. Here there arises a question which is often mulled
over by men who grumble and are ready to blame anything
at all for sin, except themselves. They say, for example: “If
Adam and Eve sinned, what have we poor creatures done that
we should be born with the blindness of ignorance and with
the anguish of difficulty? First, in ignorance of what we ought
to do, we fall into error; then, when the precepts of justice
begin to be made known to us, we have the will to fulfill
them and cannot do so because some kind of compulsion
from carnal concupiscence resists our efforts." In reply to such
men, I will answer briefly that they should be quiet and
should stop murmuring against God. They might have
grounds to complain if no man had ever triumphed over
error and lust. But there is everywhere present One who makes
manifold use of creatures, at the service of Him their Lord,
to recall the man who has turned away from Him, to teach
him when he believes, to console him when he has hope, to
encourage him when he loves, to assist his efforts, to hear him
when he prays. You are not charged with a fault because you
are in ignorance against your will, but because you fail to
seek knowledge that you do not have. Nor are you at fault
because you do not bind up your wounded members, but
because you neglect Him who wants to heal them. These
are personal sins of your own. No man has been denied a
knowledge of the benefit of inquiring after something where
ignorance is of no benefit, or of how he should make humble
avowal of his weakness so that, while searching after knowl-
edge and confessing his weakness, he may be assisted by Him
who experiences neither error nor difficulty in coming to our
aid.

54, Wrong actions done by anyone from ignorance and the
inability to perform good acts that he wants to, are called
sins for the very reason that they have their origin in the
214 SAINT AUGUSTINE

first sin, which was voluntary, and it is this previous sin
which has merited these consequences. We use the term
“tongue” not only for the bodily member which moves about
in our mouth when we speak, but also for the effect produced
by this movement of the tongue, namely, the arrangement and
sequence of words. It is in this sense that we say that Greek
is one tongue, and Latin another. Similarly, we use the term
“sin” not only in the strict sense of a fault which one com-
mits knowingly and willingly, but also to indicate the effects
which follow necessarily as punishment for such sin.

So, too, we use the term “nature” in different senses. In
the strict sense, we speak of man as having a specific nature
in which he was originally created in the state of innocence
as one of a class. We use it in another sense to indicate the
nature into which we are now born as mortal creatures, ig-
norant and slaves to the flesh, following the sentence of con-
demnation which was passed upon the first man. It is in this
sense that the Apostle says: “For we were also by nature
children of wrath, just as the others.”

Chapter 20

55. As we are born from the first union, subject to ig-
norance and difficulty and death, because through sin our
first parents were cast headlong into error, misery, and death,
so too has it pleased the justice of the Supreme God and Ruler
of the universe, first to reveal His justice by punishment at the
time of man’s origin, and then, as man advanced in time, to
manifest His mercy as a Liberator. Though under a sentence
of condemnation, the first man was not deprived of the
happiness of having children. It was possible that even from
his offspring, however carnal and mortal, something should
appear and, in its own way, be a thing of beauty and an
adornment for the earth. Yet, equity would not allow Adam

1 Eph. 23.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 215

to beget offspring better than himself. But it was only right
that, from the moment of turning to God, each one should
not only be unhampered in his desire but should even be
aided in overcoming the punishment which man had merited
at the beginning by turning away from God. In this way, too,
the Creator of the universe showed how easy it would have
been for man, had he so willed, to preserve the condition in
which he was created since even his offspring were able to
overcome the condition that was theirs by birth.

56. Again, if only a single soul was created from which are
derived the souls of all men that are born, who can say that
he did not sin when the first man sinned? But if souls are
created one by one in each man that is born, it is not in-
congruous, but rather altogether fitting and in accord with
order, that the evil merits of a former soul should be the
natural inheritance of one that follows, and that the good
merits of the succeeding soul should be the natural possession
of the former. How is it unworthy of the Creator that He
should have chosen even this way to show how the soul's
dignity so far excels bodily creatures that one soul can begin
to rise up from that condition which another had come to by
its fall? When the sinful soul has reached the condition of
ignorance and difficulty, this is properly called a punishment
because the soul was better before this punishment. If, not
only before sinning, but before beginning upon life, one soul
begins to exist in the same condition to which another had
come after a sinful life, it still possesses no small good for
which to give thanks to its Creator, since even at the time of
its creation and beginning, it is more excellent than the best
of bodies. That the soul should not only enjoy a natural
superiority over all bodies, but should also have power, with
its Creator's help, to perfect itself and be able to acquire and
possess by its pious efforts all the virtues by which it is freed
from the anguish of difficulty and the blindness of ignorance
—all these are no ordinary blessings.
216 SAINT AUGUSTINE

IE this is so, ignorance and difficulty will not be a punish-
ment for sin to souls at birth, but a stimulus to make prog-
ress and the first step on the way to perfection. It is no small
advantage that the soul, previous to any merit for good works,
should have received a natural power of discernment to
enable it to rank wisdom above error, and rest above difficulty,
so it can attain these, not through birth, but by its own effort.
But if a soul is unwilling to do so, it will be justly held as
guilty of sin for not having made good use of the power it
received. Though born in a state of ignorance and difficulty,
it is not compelled by any necessity to remain in that state
in which it was born. No one but God Almighty could be the
Creator of such souls, who creates them before they love Him
and perfects them once they have loved Him. He gives them
being when they do not exist, and confers happiness upon
those that love Him as the Source of their existence.

57. But if there are any souls already existing in some
secret habitation, which God has assigned them, and these
are sent forth to animate and rule over the bodies of in-
dividual men at birth, they are sent for this particular task.
They must govern well the body, born under the punishment
of sin, namely, the sentence of death incurred by the first
man, that is, they must curb it through the practice of virtue
and bring it into a just and lawful subjection so as to win
for the body, too, a state of heavenly immortality in due order
and at the appropriate time. When these souls embark upon
the present life and endure the burden of carrying about this
mortal frame, they must also endure the forgetfulness of their
former life and the travail of the present one. The result will
be ignorance and difficulty, which, in the case of the first man,
was the penalty of death in order to bring him to an aware-
ness of the miserable state of the soul; whereas, for these souls,
this furnishes them an opportunity to restore the state of in-
corruption to the body. Again, this is spoken of as sin only
because the flesh, which springs from a sinful source, causes
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 217

ignorance and difficulty in the souls that enter it. But the
blame for this is not to be placed either upon these souls
or upon their Creator.

The Creator has given them the power to discharge faith-
fully these burdensome tasks and has provided a way of
faith for the blindness resulting from forgetfulness. Most of
all, He has given them the power of discernment which makes
every soul acknowledge that it should seek to know where
ignorance is of no avail, that it should strive unremittingly
to discharge its difficult tasks in order to overcome the
difficulty of doing what is right, and should implore help
from its Creator to assist it in its efforts. Outwardly, by His
Law, and inwardly, by speaking to the depths of man’s heart,
He directs the soul to exert itself, while He prepares a state
of glory in the Blessed City for those who triumph over him
who led the first man to unhappiness and overcame him by
his wicked persuasion. These men accept such unhappiness
in order to overcome him by the excellence of their faith.
It is no small glory to be engaged in a warfare in which we
overcome the devil by accepting that very punishment which
enables him to boast that he has made man his captive. But
any man who is so captivated by the love of the present life
that he neglects this duty will have no right whatever to
charge this criminal desertion to the command of the Ruler.
Rather, being subject to the Ruler of all things, he must take
his place on the side of him in whose shameful service he
found such delight as to desert his own ranks.

58. But if souls existing elsewhere are not dispatched by
the Lord God, but come of their own accord to dwell in
bodies, it is easy to see why the Creator should not be
blamed at all for whatever ignorance and difficulty have re-
sulted from their own free choice. Even if God had sent them
Himself, He would be altogether blameless, since, despite
their ignorance and difficulty, He has not withdrawn from
them the freedom to ask and seek and strive, but is ready to
218 SAINT AUGUSTINE

give to those who ask, to show the way to those who seek,
and to open to those who knock. To souls that are zealous
and well-disposed, He would bestow the power to overcome
such ignorance and difficulty and gain the crown of glory. To
those, however, that are neglectful and wish to allege weak-
ness for their sins, He would not reproach their ignorance
and difficulty as sinful. Yet, because they have chosen to re-
main in such a state rather than to arrive at the truth and
a ready will, He will inflict a just punishment upon them be-
cause they lacked the zeal to seek and learn, to make humble
confession of sin, and to pray.

Chapter 21

59. No one should rashly affirm any one of these four views
about the soul: 1) souls come into existence by generation;
2) souls are newly created for each one who is born; 8) souls
already existing elsewhere are sent by God into bodies; 4)
souls descend into bodies of their own accord. Either this
question has not yet been explained and clarified by Catholic
commentators of the Sacred Scripture, as the obscurity and
perplexity of the matter warrant, or, if this has been done,
such writings have not yet come into my hands. Only let our
faith keep us from thinking anything false or unworthy of the
Creator's nature, for we make our way to Him along the road
of piety. If, therefore, we conceive of Him otherwise than as
He is, we will be driven towards vanity, not towards happi-
ness. But if we conceive of creatures otherwise than as they
are, there is no danger, provided we do not regard our
^1 Only the first two of these, namely, spiritual generationism and crea-

tionism, are seriously considered. From a letter to Jerome (Ep. 166),

it would appear that Augustine inclined towards creationism but

found himself unable to explain the transmission of original sin in
such an hypothesis. Actually, the problem of the soul's origin re-

mained unsolved for him even to the end of his life. Cf. Retractations
1.1.8; Opus imperfectum contra Iulianum 2.178.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 219

knowledge as certain. In our pursuit of happiness, it is not
the creature, but the Creator, that we are commanded to seek.
1f our convictions about the Creator are other than what they
should be, we are victims of a most pernicious kind of error.
For no one can reach the happy life by tending towards
something that either does not exist, or if it does exist, can-
not make him happy.

60. In order to contemplate eternal truth in a way that
will enable us to enjoy it and cling to it, a path through
temporal things, suited to our infirmity, has been marked
out for us, namely, that we accept on faith past and future
events so far as this suffices for men on their journey towards
things eternal. These teachings of faith are so regulated by
God's mercy as to give them the greatest authority. Things
present, however, as far as creatures are concerned, are per-
ceived as transitory through the inconstancy and changing
nature of the body and soul. We cannot know things of this
kind at all unless we experience them. We must accept, then,
on divine authority whatever we are told about any creature
at all, whether past or future. Some, however, passed away
before we could perceive them, while others have not yet
come into our sense experience. Nevertheless, we must readily
believe them because they help us very much to strengthen
our hope and to arouse our love. At the same time, they
remind us of our deliverance which God has not failed to
provide throughout the orderly course of the ages.

Now any error that masquerades as divine authority can
be best refuted by this line of reasoning; namely, can we show
that it believes, or asserts as true, that there exists any form
of beauty, even though changeable, apart from God's crea-
tion, or that any changeable form of beauty exists in God's
nature, or that it maintains that God's nature is something of
greater or less perfection than the Trinity? The Christian
exercises all possible vigilance towards a pious and careful
understanding of the Trinity and directs all his progress
220 SAINT AUGUSTINE

towards this end. But this is not the place for a discussion
on the unity of the Trinity and on the equality and properties
of each Person in the Trinity. To recount certain truths con-
cerning the Lord God, Author of all things and the Source
of their ordered perfection, the Ruler of the universe, truths
that pertain to salutary faith and provide gentle nourishment
and a useful support for the soul’s first efforts to rise from
the things of earth to those of heaven—this is easy to do, and
many have already done it. But to give a thorough treatment
of this whole question, and present it so that every man’s
intelligence can be sufficiently won over to the clear light of
reason, so far as is possible in this life, and to express it in
words, or even in our thoughts, can hardly seem an easy task
for any man, or, at any rate, for us.

Now, then, let us proceed with what we have undertaken
so far as we are given help and leave to do so. As for things
created, we must promptly believe whatever is related to us
about the past or is prophesied about the future, if this helps
to promote sound religion by awakening in us a sincere love
of God and our neighbor. Against unbelievers, however, we
must defend it to the point of either crushing their unbelief
by the weight of authority, or by showing them as best we
can, first, that it is not foolish to believe such things; secondly,
that it is foolish not to believe them. Nevertheless, we ought
to refute false teaching about the present, particularly, about
things unchangeable, rather than what concerns the past and
the future, and should disprove such teaching by means of
clear arguments.

61. Within the order of temporal events, our expectation
of the things to come should certainly occupy our attention
more than an inquiry into things of the past since, even in
the Sacred Books, the events narrated as past are represented
either as a type, or promise, or a witness of things to come.
Actually, even where things of the present life are concerned,
whether favorable or unfavorable, little concern is shown for

THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 221

one’s past condition, but the weight of anxiety rests wholly
upon one’s hopes for the future. By a kind of natural instinct
within us, things that have happened to us, once they are
over, are regarded as though they had never taken place as
far as having any influence upon our happiness or unhappi-
ness is concerned. What harm can come to me if I do not
know when I began to exist since I know that I now exist
and do not despair of existing in the future? I do not turn
my thoughts to things of the past, as if I lived in fear over a
disastrous error for having thought of them otherwise than
they were, but I direct my course towards what the future
holds for me, under the merciful guidance of my Creator. Con-
sequently, if I entertain any false belief or view about my
future existence, or about God with whom I shall be existing
in the future, I must strenuously avoid any such error. Other-
wise, I shall either fail to make the necessary preparation, or
I shall be unable to reach the goal I have in mind because I
have mistaken one thing for something else.

Thus, if I were to buy a coat, it would not be a handicap
were I to forget about last winter, but it would be, if I
thought there were no threat of cold for the future. Similarly,
my soul will not be handicapped if it chances to forget some-
thing it endured in the past, provided it is careful now to
fasten its attention upon the goal for which it is admonished
to prepare itself from now on. Again, for example, no harm
would come to a man sailing for Rome if he were to forget
from what shore he had set sail, so long as he knew how to
steer his course from the position where he happened to be.
But it would do him no good to remember the shore from
which he embarked on his journey if he miscalculated about
the port of Rome and should suffer shipwreck upon the
shoals. So, too, if I do not remember the time my life began,
this will be no hindrance to me so long as I know what the
end is wherein I am to find rest. Any recollection or con-
jecture about the beginning of my life would be no help to
222 SAINT AUGUSTINE

me if I should run upon the reefs of error by holding views
unworthy of that same God who alone is the end of the soul's
labors.

62. These remarks should not be construed as meaning
that we would prohibit men who are capable from inquiring
according to the divinely inspired Scriptures as to whether
souls are generated from souls, or are separately created for
each body they animate, or are sent from elsewhere by God’s
command to govern and animate the body, or make their own
way into bodies of their own volition. We do not forbid such
inquiry if reason demands that we examine and discuss these
things in order to solve some important question, or if we
are granted leisure from more important matters for an in-
quiry and examination of these matters. Rather, my remarks
were intended to prevent a person from showing unreasonable
displeasure in a question of this kind towards one who does
not accept his view because of a doubt that may be all too
human. Besides, even if someone should acquire a certain
and clear grasp of this matter, he must not suppose that
someone else has lost all hope of the things to come just be-
cause he does not remember his origins in the past.

Chapter 22

63. Whatever the status of the problem, namely, whether
we should omit it altogether or defer it for consideration
at another time, this will not prevent us from seeing clearly
the truth of the matter at hand, that souls suffer punish-
ment for their sins and do so without detriment to the
majesty of God's nature, which remains inviolate, all-just,
steadfast, and unchanging. As we have already explained at
some length, these sins must be imputed to the will alone
and we need look no further for the cause of sin.

64. But if ignorance and difficulty are man's natural state,
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 223

then it is from this condition that the soul begins to progress
and advance towards knowledge and a state of rest until the
happy life is fully realized in it. If, of its own accord, the
soul neglects to make such progress in a knowledge of higher
things and in the practice of piety, though it has not been
denied the power to do so, then it deserves to be plunged
into a worse state of ignorance and difficulty, which is already
penal in character, and it takes its place among lower creatures
according to a universal governance that is perfectly fitting
and proper. The soul is charged with guilt, not because of its
natural condition of ignorance and weakness, but because it
made no effort to acquire knowledge and did not apply itself
sufficiently to obtain the power to do what is right. Ignorance
of language and inability to speak are natural to the infant.
Such ignorance and difficulty in speaking are not only blame-
less under the rules of grammar, but are even a source of
pleasure and delight for our human sensibilities. It was no
fault of the child that it failed to acquire this ability, nor
has it through its own fault lost the ability after having
once acquired it.

Consequently, if our happiness consisted of eloquence, and
if it were accounted a crime to make a mistake in speaking,
as it is when we perform sinful acts in life, certainly no one
would be blamed for being an infant, because it is from this
state that a beginning is made towards attaining eloquence.
If, however, because of a perverse will, one should remain in
such a state, or should fall back into it, he would clearly be
deserving of condemnation.

So even now, if ignorance of the truth and difficulty in
doing right are natural to man and are the point of departure
whence man begins his ascent to the happy state of wisdom
and rest, no one is justified in reproaching happiness for its
natural origin. But if a man is unwilling to advance or is
willing to be a backslider, he rightly deserves to suffer the
penalty.
224 SAINT AUGUSTINE

65. But the soul’s Creator is to be praised in every respect,
either because He endowed the soul from the very beginning
with a capacity for the highest good, or because He helps it
to advance, or because He implements its progress and brings
it to perfection, or because He subjects it to order by con-
demning it according to its just deserts whenever it sins,
that is, when it either refuses to raise itself from its initial
state to perfection, or when it falls back after it has made
some progress. He did not therefore create it evil just because
it was not so perfect then as when it received the power to
become so later on. For all perfections found in bodies are far
inferior to the soul in its original state, and yet any person of
sound discernment would judge that even these deserved to be
praised for what they are. The soul's ignorance of what it
ought to do stems from the fact that it has not yet received
this knowledge. But it will receive this too if it makes good use
of what has already been given it, for it has received the power
to seek it with diligence and devotion, if only it chooses to do
so, Again, the soul finds itself unable to do at once what it
sees ought to be done because it has likewise not yet received
this power. One part of it, the higher, has gone ahead to
perceive the good of a righteous act, but another part, the
more sluggish and carnal element, is not brought into con-
formity with this view. Hence the soul is prompted by this
very difficulty to beg Him for help in making progress, from
whom it sees it owes its start.

This is why it loves God all the more, since it is elevated
to its happy state, not by its own resources, but by the mercy
of Him to whose goodness it owes its existence. The more it
loves God, the Source of its existence, the more securely does
it find repose in Him and the more fully does it experience
the joys of His eternity.

We would be wrong to call the young and tender sapling
barren, even though it goes through several summer seasons
without bearing fruit until the proper time arrives to show
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 225

its fruit. Why, then, should the soul’s Creator not be praised
with all due reverence if He has given the soul a kind of
beginning that enables it to mature with the fruits of wisdom
and justice by its efforts and growth, and when He has so
dignified it that it is within its power to reach out for
happiness, if it wills to do so?

Chapter 23

66. An insidious objection is often levelled against this line
of reasoning by ignorant men concerning the death of young
children and the bodily sufferings with which we often see
them afflicted. What need, they ask, was there for a child to be
born when it departed this life before it could set out to
merit in life? Or, what will be its destiny in the future judg-
ment, seeing that it has no place either among the just, since
it performed no good deeds, or among the wicked, since it
did nothing sinful?

Here is my answer to their objection. Viewing the universe
as a whole and the perfect order prevailing throughout the
entire creation spread over time and place, it is impossible
that the creation of any man would be superfluous in a
universe where not even the creation of a single leaf of a tree
is superfluous. What is really superfluous is any inquiry about
the merits of one who has acquired no merits. We need have
no fear that there may be a life in between virtue and vice,
or that the Judge may pass a sentence halfway between reward
and punishment.

67. Here, too, men are in the habit of asking what benefit
comes to young children from the sacrament of Christ's
baptism, since they often die after receiving it and before they
could know anything about it. On this point, it is piously
believed, and quite rightly so, that the child benefits from the
faith of those who present it for baptism. Such a belief finds
226 SAINT AUGUSTINE

support in the salutary authority of the Church, so that each
one may realize how beneficial his own faith is for himself
when it can also be turned to the benefit of others who do not
yet have faith of their own. What benefit did the widow's
son derive from his own faith, which he certainly did not
possess once he was dead, whereas his mother's faith was
instrumental in his being raised from the dead?! How much
more, then, can the faith of another provide for the child
whose lack of faith cannot be imputed to it?

68. A more serious complaint, almost compassionate in
tone, is frequently voiced concerning the bodily suffering
which afflicts young children. Because of their age, they are
without sin, provided the souls animating them did not exist
before they became human beings. What evil have these done,
they ask, that they should undergo such sufferings? You might
think there could be a reward for innocence before a person
is able to cause harm! But God accomplishes some good in
reforming the lives of older people when these are chastised by
the suffering and death of their little ones so dear to them.
Why should this not happen since, once it is over, it will be
as if it never happened for those who suffered it? On the
other hand, those for whose sake this has happened, will
either become better if, after having profited from these
temporal trials to reform their lives, they will choose to live
more righteously; or they will have no excuse when they are
punished at the future judgment if they failed to make use
of the suffering of this present life to turn their desires
towards life eternal. Besides, who can tell what good recom-
pense God, in His hidden designs, has in store for these
children when, as a result of their suffering, the harshness
of parents is softened, their faith is strengthened, and their
compassion is made evident to all? Though they have per-
formed no good acts, they have nevertheless endured these
sufferings without having committed any sins. It is not without
reason that the Church proposes for our veneration as martyrs,

1 CE. Luke 7.12-15.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 227

even the infants who were slain when the Lord Jesus Christ
was being sought out for destruction by Herod.

69. These carping critics, who neglect to study such ques-
tions carefully but go about airing their opinions garrulously,
usually try to shake the faith of those less instructed on the
problem of pain and hardships also suffered by animals.
What evil have even these deserved, they ask, or what can
they hope for in the way of good that they should suffer such
distress? They speak or think this way because they take a
very unfair view of things and, incapable as they are of
understanding the nature and excellence of the highest good,
they would have everything conform to their own idea of
what it is. They cannot conceive of a supreme good beyond
the highest bodies which have a heavenly nature and are not
so subject to corruption. Hence, without any regard for order,
they make the unreasonable demand that animals should
suffer neither death nor corruption in their bodies, as if they
were not mortal, though they are on the lowest plane, or as
if they were evil, just because the heavenly bodies are better.

Besides, the pain experienced by beasts reveals clearly a
power of the animal soul which is wonderful and admirable
in its own way. The very fact of their suffering makes it quite
clear how much these souls strive for unity in ruling over
their bodies and imparting life to them. For what is pain,
if not a conscious struggle against disintegration and dissolu-
tion? Hence it is as plain as day how eager and tenacious the
soul is to preserve unity throughout. It directs its attention
to suffering within the body and is troubled by the deteriora-
tion of its unity and integrity, not in a voluntary or indiffer-
ent way, but with resistance and by putting up a struggle.
Except for pain in the animal, we would have no evidence
of the intense desire for unity in the lower living» things,
Without such evidence, we would not be made sufficiently
aware that all these have been constituted by the supreme,
sublime, and unspeakable unity of their Creator.
228 SAINT. AUGUSTINE.

70. Indeed, if you reflect upon this matter reverently and
carefully, you will see that all the beauty and movement of
those creatures which come to man's attention speak words of
instruction for us. Through the variety of their movements
and tendencies, as by so many different tongues, they every-
where proclaim and cry out that we should recognize their
Creator. Of those creatures that experience neither pain nor
pleasure, there is not one that is not impelled by its unity to
realize its distinctive beauty, or, in a general way, to achieve
a degree of permanence within its nature. So too, among
creatures that experience the anguish of pain or the delight of
pleasure, there is none whose aversion to pain and desire for
pleasure does not thereby attest to the fact that it shuns dis-
integration and seeks unity. In their very desire to know,
wherein rational souls find a natural delight, they reduce all
the objects of their perception to a unity, while, in the avoid-
ance of error, they simply shun the confusion caused by mean-
ingless equivocation. Why is all equivocation troublesome, if
not for the fact that it has no fixed unity? Accordingly, it is
now evident that whether they cause or suffer harm, whether
they give or receive pleasure, they all suggest and proclaim
the unity of the Creator.

But if ignorance and difficulty with which this present life
must take its beginning are not the natural condition of
souls, then we must conclude that these have either been
assumed as a debt or have been imposed as a punishment.
Now I think we have had enough discussion on these points.

Chapter 24

71. We should ask what the first man himself was like
when he was created, rather than how his descendants have
been propagated. Some think they are displaying great acumen
when they propose the question as follows. If the first man
was created wise, why, they ask, was he misled, and if he was
‘THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 229

created foolish, how can God not be the cause of vice, since
folly is the greatest of the vices? They speak as if it were im-
possible for human nature to be endowed with some inter-
mediate state, besides folly and wisdom, which could be called
neither folly nor wisdom. Actually, a man begins to be either
foolish or wise, and must be called one or the other, only
from the time he is able to possess wisdom and when, by
neglecting to do so, his will is guilty of the vice of folly. No
one is foolish enough to call an infant foolish, though it
would be more absurd of him to want to call it wise. Though
already a human being, the infant cannot be called either
wise or foolish.

Hence it is clear that human nature is endowed with an
intermediate state which you may not properly call either
folly or wisdom. Consequently, if anyone were born with a
soul in the same state as those who lack wisdom through
negligence, no one could properly call him foolish, since he
could tell that his conditions arose, not from vice, but from
nature.

Folly is not any kind of ignorance at all about what we
should seek and avoid, but an ignorance born of vice. This
is why we do not say that irrational animals are foolish, since
they have not been endowed with the power to become wise.
But we often use terms in a way that is similar, but not the
same. Though blindness is the most serious of all defects in
the eye, it is not a defect in newborn puppies, and cannot,
properly speaking, be termed blindness.

72. Accordingly, if a man was created in a state where,
though yet unwise, he could receive a command that he ought
certainly to obey, it is neither surprising that he could be
seduced, nor an injustice that he should suffer punishment
for failing to obey. Neither is the Creator the cause of his
vice, since it was not yet a vice for man to be without wisdom
when he had not yet received the power to have it. Yet he
did have something that would enable him to advance towards
230 SAINT AUGUSTINE

what he did not yet have, provided he was willing to make
good use of it. It is one thing for a man to be rational, it is
something else to be wise. Through reason, man became a fit
subject for commands, and he must show himself faithful to
these and so fulfill all that is commanded of him. Just as it
is natural for reason to grasp a command, so too, it is the
observance of such a command that gains for us the possession
of wisdom. What nature does in the way of grasping the
command is accomplished by the will in carrying it out. And
as rational nature merits, in a way, to receive a command, so
too, it is the observance of it that merits the bestowal of
wisdom.

Now, from the time a man begins to be capable of receiv-
ing a command, from that moment he begins to have the
power to sin. Before a man becomes wise, he can sin in two
ways, either by failing to make himself fit to receive the
command, or by not observing the command once he has
received it. But if a man already wise turns from wisdom, then
he sins. Just as the command does not issue from the person
commanded, so too, wisdom does not come from the person
who is enlightened but from Him who is the Source of
enlightenment.

Is there any reason then why man’s Creator should not be
praised? Man is something good, and because he is capable
of receiving a command, he is something better than the
beast. He is better yet when he has already received a com-
mand, better yet when he has obeyed it, and still better when
he is made happy by the eternal light of wisdom.

The malice of sin consists in a man’s failure either to
accept the command, or to observe it, or to be steadfast in the
contemplation of wisdom. This enables us to see how the first
man could be seduced by sin, even though he was created wise.
Since this sin was within his free choice, it entailed a just
penalty by reason of God’s law. It is in this sense too that
the Apostle says: "Professing themselves to be wise, they be-
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 231

came foolish.” For pride turns a man from wisdom and folly
follows in its wake. Surely, folly is a kind of blindness, as
the same ‘Apostle indicates, where he says: ". . . and their
foolish heart was darkened."? Now what is the cause of this
darkness, but the turning away from the light of wisdom?
And what causes this turning away, if not the fact that man,
whose good is God, wills to be his own good, just as God is
His own good? Whence the words of Scripture: "My soul is
troubled in my own regard,"? and, ‘Taste, and you shall be
as gods."

73. In examining this matter, some are disturbed by the
question as to whether the first man fell from God through
folly, or whether he became foolish by falling from God. If
you answer that he fell from wisdom through folly, it will
appear that he was foolish before he fell from wisdom, so
that folly was the cause of it. Likewise, if you reply that he
became foolish by falling, they will ask whether, in doing
so, he acted foolishly or wisely. If he acted wisely, he did
what was right and committed no sin; if he acted foolishly,
then, they say, it was the folly already found in him that
made him fall since, without folly, he could not do anything
foolish. 'This makes it clear that there is some middle state
through which a man passes from wisdom to folly. We cannot
say that this state resulted either from folly or wisdom, and
it is one that men in this life can only understand in terms
of its contraries, Thus, no mortal can become wise unless he
passes from folly to wisdom. If the transition itself is made
foolishly, it is certainly not done well, which would be a
very foolish thing to say; if the transition is made wisely,
then wisdom was already present in man before he passed
over to wisdom, which is something equally absurd. This
makes it clear that there is a middle state which cannot

1 Rom. 1.22.
2 Rom. 1.21.
ZEND
4 Gen. 25.
232 SAINT AUGUSTINE

go by either name. So, too, when the first man passed from
the heights of wisdom to folly, the transition was neither
foolish nor wise. It is something like sleep and wakefulness,
where falling asleep is not the same as sleeping and where
awakening is not the same as being awake, but where there
is a passing from one state to another. There is, however, this
difference, that the latter generally happen involuntarily,
while the former are always voluntary, which is why the
punishments that follow are perfectly just.

Chapter 25

74. But the will is not drawn to any action unless some-
thing is perceived. It is within anyone's power to accept or
reject something, but it is not in his power to be unaffected
by what he sees. We must acknowledge that the soul is
affected by the things it perceives, both of a higher and lower
order, so that a rational being may take what it chooses from
each, and, on the merit of what it takes, there follows un-
happiness or happiness In the garden of paradise, for ex-
ample, God's command belonged to the perception of higher
things, the suggestion of the devil, to things below. Neither
the command enjoined upon him by God nor the suggestion
made by the devil was in the power of man. Just how free
man was from having to yield to the lower attraction of what
he perceived, when he was free from the constraints of diffi-
culty and living a sound life of wisdom, can be seen from the
fact that even foolish men overcome this attraction as they
approach wisdom, even though they find it hard to forego
the deadly delights of their pernicious habits.

75. A question may arise at this point. If man was con-
fronted by both classes of objects that he perceived, God's pre-
cept on the one hand, and the serpent's suggestion on the
other, how was it suggested to the devil himself to pursue
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 233

wickedness and so fall from his place on high? If he had not
been affected by something he perceived, he would not have
chosen to do what he did, for, unless something had entered
his mind, he would not have turned his thoughts at all to
wickedness. How, then, did it enter his mind to embark upon
something which would make a devil out of a good angel?

One who wills, certainly has to will something, and unless
this something is either suggested externally by the bodily
senses, or arises in the mind in some hidden way, he cannot
will it. We must distinguish, then, two classes of things that
are perceived. The first comes from the will of one who makes
use of persuasion, as the devil did, when man sinned by yield-
ing to him. The second class comprises things which come to
the attention of the mind or to the bodily senses. Apart
from the Changeless Trinity, which does not fall under the
soul’s comprehension but rather transcends it, the things that
it perceives are these: first, the soul itself, by which we per-
ceive that we are alive; secondly, the body, which is governed
by the soul, enabling the soul to move whatever member is
needed to perform an act at the time. Bodily things, on the
other hand, are all subject to the perception of the bodily
senses.

76. In contemplating supreme wisdom—which, being un-
changeable, is not the soul—the mutable soul also gets a view
of itself and somehow comes into its own mind. This is only
possible because of the difference that separates the soul from
God, though even the soul is something which, after God, can
be a source of delight. But it is better for the soul when it for-
gets itself in its love of the unchangeable God, or utterly
despises itself by comparison with Him. If, on the other hand,
it gets in its own way, so to speak, and takes delight in itself,
by a perverse imitation of God in its desire to enjoy its own
power, then the more it wants to be greater, so much does it
become less. Thus, "pride is the beginning of all sin, and
the beginning of pride is man's apostasy from God.”2

1 Ecclus. [Sirach] 10.15, 14.
234 SAINT AUGUSTINE

In addition to his pride, there was the devil’s insidious
ill-will to urge upon man that very pride which he realized
had brought damnation upon himself. Hence the provision
that man should receive a corrective punishment rather than
one which would entail his destruction. Thus, while the devil
made himself an example of pride for man, the Lord, through
whom we have the promise of life eternal, offered himself to
man as an example of humility. Consequently, since Christ
has purchased us by His blood, after having endured indescrib-
able trials and suffering, let us cling steadfastly to our Lib-
erator with such great love and be so transported by the
light of His countenance that the sight of things below may
not turn us from the higher vision. And even though some
suggestion inspired by a desire for things below should enter
our mind, the thought of eternal punishment and the tor-
ments suffered by the devil should bring us back to our senses.

77. Such is the beauty of justice and the delight of that
eternal light, namely, changeless truth and wisdom, that, even
were one permitted to abide in it only for the space of a single
day, yet, for this alone, he would rightly and justly regard
as nought the countless years of the present life, though they
were filled with delights and an affluence of temporal goods.
These words of the Psalmist: "For better is one day in thy
courts over thousands,"? were expressed with no small degree
of genuine fervor. They can also be understood, however, in
another sense, where a thousand days may stand for the
changing character of time, while one day stands for the
changelessness of eternity.

I do not know that I have passed over any point needed to
answer your questions, so far as the Lord has seen fit to allow
me. And even if some question does come to your mind, the
limits of this book compel me to bring it to an end and to
rest at last from our discussion.

2 Ps. 83.11.
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 235

RETRACTATIONS, Book 1, Ch. 9
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL

1. While still sojourning in Rome, we decided to inquire
into the origin of evil by way of a discussion. Our discussion
was so directed as to lead us to a possible understanding,
through rational reflection and inquiry, of what we already
believed about the matter, so far as God might assist our
inquiry and, since we were agreed, once the arguments had
been carefully examined, that evil came about only by the
free choice of the will, the three books which resulted from
this discussion were entitled “The Free Choice of the Will.” I
completed the second and third of these, as best I could at
the time, after my ordination to the priesthood at Hippo
Regius.

2. So many subjects were discussed in these books that some
questions which came up were deferred, either because I could
not solve them or because they would have required a lengthy
discussion just at that time. But whatever solutions were
proposed in either case, even when it was not clear which of
those proposed for these same questions was closer to the
truth, our reasoning led us nevertheless to this conclusion,
that wherever the truth lay, we should believe, and even make
it clear, that God is to be praised. This discussion was under-
taken because of those who deny that evil has its origin in the
free choice of the will and contend that if this were the case,
God is at fault, since He is the Creator of all natures. In
line with their wicked error—they are the Manichees—they
would thus introduce a kind of changeless evil nature, co-
eternal with God. Since this was the problem under considera-
tion, there is no discussion in these books concerning the
grace of God by which He so predestines His elect that He
Himself even makes ready the wills of those among them
who are already making use of their free choice. But when-
236 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ever there was occasion to mention this grace, this was done in
passing, and not as a defense of grace by means of painstaking
arguments, as if this were the subject under discussion. To
inquire into the origin of evil is one thing; to inquire how
we can return to our original good, or to one that is better,
is another matter.

8. Accordingly, the recent Pelagian heretics, who would
assert the free choice of the will so as to leave no place for
God’s grace, since they maintain that it is given in accordance
with our merits, must not be elated, as though I had defended
their course; for I said many things in these books in favor of
free will as the circumstances of the discussion demanded. In
the first book 1 did, in fact, state that “evil deeds are punished
by God’s justice,” and added, “unless they were committed
voluntarily, their punishment would not be just" (1.1.1).
Again, when I said that the will is so great a good that it
is deservedly preferred to all bodies and external goods, I
said: “I believe you see then that it lies within our will
either to enjoy or to lack so great and true a good as this.
For what is more within the power of the will than the will
itself?” (1.12.26) And, in another place: “How are we justi-
fied then in regarding as doubtful the fact that it is by the
will that we merit and live a good and praiseworthy life, and,
by the same will, a life that is shameful and unhappy, even
though formerly we were never wise?" (1.13.28) Again, in
another place: “Accordingly, any man with the will to lead
a good and upright life, provided he prefers this will to all
fleeting goods, will acquire so great a possession with such
great ease that to have what he wills is the same thing as to
will it” (1.13.29). Similarly, I said elsewhere: “Certainly,
the eternal law, which it is now time to consider again, has
unalterably decreed that merit is in the will, whereas reward
and punishment are identified with happiness and unhappi-
ness” (1.14.80). And, in another place: “We also agreed that
what each man chooses to pursue and embrace is within the
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 237

power of the will to determine” (1.16.34). And in the second
book: “For man himself, insofar as he is man, is something
good because he can live an upright life whenever he so
wishes" (2.1.2). And I said in another place: ". . . moral con-
duct is only possible by free will” (2.18.47). And in the third
book: “What need, then, is there to look for a cause of that
movement by which the soul turns from the unchangeable to
a changeable good? We agree that it belongs to the soul alone
and is voluntary, and, consequently, culpable. Furthermore,
all practical instruction in this matter has this for its aim,
that, renouncing and restraining this kind of movement, we
turn our will from the instability of temporal things to the
enjoyment of the everlasting good” (3.1.2). And, in another
place: “The voice of truth is making itself heard very well
in you. If our act of willing is not in our power, then you
could not be conscious of anything else that is. Hence nothing
is so much in our power as the will itself, for it is there at
hand the very instant that we will something” (3.3.7). Again,
in another place: “If you receive praise for seeing what you
are obliged to do, though you can only see this in Him who
is the changeless truth, how much more should He be praised
who has both laid a command upon your will and has given
you the power to fulfill it, and has not allowed your refusal
to go unpunished?” Then I went on to add: “If everyone must
render what he has received, and if man has been so made
that he sins of necessity, then it is his duty to sin. Therefore,
whenever he sins, he is doing what he ought to do. If it is
wicked to make such an assertion, then no one is forced by his
nature to sin” (3.16.46) . And again: “But what could possibly
come before the will to be its cause? Either the will is itself
the cause, and there will be no regress from this root of the
will, or it is not the will, and the will is without sin. Con-
sequently, either the will itself is ultimately the cause of sin,
or the ultimate cause of sin is without sin. Sin can be justly
imputed to no one but a sinner, and can therefore only be
238 SAINT AUGUSTINE

justly imputed to one who wills it” (3.17.49). And, a little
later: “. . . for how can anyone sin where he cannot possibly
be on his guard? But sins are committed, and therefore it is
possible to be on one’s guard” (3.18.50). Pelagius used these
statements of mine as evidence in a book of his. When I
answered this book, 1 decided to entitle the book Nature and
Grace.

4, Because no mention of grace was made in these and
similar statements of mine, since we were not dealing with
this question at the time, the Pelagians think or might think,
that I held their views. But they are mistaken to think so. To
be sure, it is the will that enables us to sin and to live a good
life, and this was the problem under consideration in those
statements of mine. Unless, therefore, the will is freed from
the servitude which makes it “the servant of sin,” and unless
it is helped to overcome its vices, it is impossible for mortal
men to lead righteous and godly lives. And unless this gift
of God, which makes the will free, came before the act of the
will, it would not be given because of the will’s merits, and
would not be grace, which, of course, is given freely. I have
treated this subject sufficiently in other works of mine, where
I refute these enemies of God’s grace, the most recent of the
heretics. Yet, even in this book, The Free Choice of the Will,
which was not written against them, since they were not yet in
existence, but against the Manichees on the subject of free
will, I did not altogether pass over in silence this grace of
God which they attempt to destroy by their base blasphemies.
As a matter of fact, I stated in the second book: ". . . not
only the great but even the least goods exist through Him
alone from whom all good things come, namely, from God."
And I added shortly afterwards: ". . . these virtues which
enable us to live rightly are great goods whereas all forms of
bodily beauty are the least goods, since we can live rightly
without them. But the powers of the soul, without which
there can be no right living, are intermediate goods. No one
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 239

puts virtues to bad use, since the function of virtue is the
good use of those things which we can also put to bad use.
No one makes bad use of what he puts to good use. Accord-
ingly, the vast liberality of God's goodness has brought into
existence not only the great, but also the intermediate and
least goods. His goodness is more to be praised for the great
than for the intermediate goods, and more for the inter-
mediate than for the least goods, but still to be praised more
for all of them than if He had not given them existence at
all" (2.19.50). And in another place: "Only make sure to
hold firm to your religious conviction that you know of no
good, either by the senses, or by the intellect, or in any other
way, that does not come from God” (2.20.54). Again, in
another place, I stated: “But, since man cannot rise of his
own will as he fell of his own will, the right hand of God,
namely, our Lord Jesus Christ, is outstretched to us from
above. Let us embrace Him with a strong faith, await Him
with a sure hope, and love Him with an ardent charity”
(ibid.).

5. Again, in the third book, following the words which, as
I mentioned, Pelagius took for his own use from my works—
*. .. for how can anyone sin where he cannot possibly be on
his guard? But sins are committed, and therefore it is pos-
sible for one to be on his guard" (3.18.50)—I went on to
say: "And yet there are things done even from ignorance
which are condemned and judged as deserving of correction,
as we read on the authority of the Sacred Writers. For ex-
ample, the Apostle says: 'I obtained mercy, because I acted
in ignorance. And the Prophet says: ‘Remember not the
deeds of my youth and of my ignorance. Actions performed
of necessity are blameworthy when a man has the will to do
right and cannot do so. Hence the words of the Apostle:
‘For the good which I will, I do not; but the evil which I
will not, I do'; and, "To will is present with me, but to
accomplish that which is good, I find not'; and, "The flesh
240 SAINT AUGUSTINE

lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. For
these things are contrary one to another, so that you do not
what things you will.’ But all these things are the lot of men
who come to exist from the time of man’s condemnation to
death; for if this is not a punishment for man, but is some-
thing natural, then there is no sin. If man does not depart
from the natural condition in which he was made, which can-
not be improved upon, then, in doing these things, he is only
acting as he should. But if man were good, he would be in a
different condition. But because he exists the way he does, he
is not good now and does not have it in his power to become
good, either because he does not see what kind of man he
ought to be, or, though seeing this, he is unable to become
what he sees he ought to be. Can there be any doubt that
this is a punishment? Now every punishment, if just, is a
punishment for sin, and is called a penalty. But if the punish-
ment is unjust, and there is no doubt that it is a punishment,
then it has been inflicted on man by some ruler who is unjust.
Besides, since only a fool would doubt the omnipotence and
justice of God, this is a just penalty and is inflicted as punish-
ment for some kind of sin. For no unjust ruler could ever
steal man from God, unknown to Him, or wrest him from
God against His will, as if God were too weak and were so
subject to threats of violence that this ruler might afflict man
with unjust punishment. It remains, then, that this is a just
punishment arising from man's condemnation” (3.18.51).
And, in another place: “But to accept falsity for truth, so as
to err unwillingly, and to be unable to refrain from lustful
acts through the resistance of carnal habits, these are not of
man’s nature as he originally existed, but are a punishment
of man inflicted after his condemnation. When we speak of
the will’s freedom to do what is right, we are speaking, of
course, of that freedom with which man was created” (3.18.52).

6. See! Long before the Pelagian heresy arose, we carried
on this discussion as if we were already engaged in debate
THE FREE CHOICE OF THE WILL 241

against the Pelagians. For we stated that while all things
good—great, intermediate, and least—are from God, free will
is found among the intermediate goods, because we can also
make bad use of it; yet, it is a kind of good without which we
cannot live a good life. The good use of the will is already
virtue, and virtue is found among the great goods which no
one can put to a bad use. And, since we said that all goods,
great, intermediate, and least, are from God, it follows that
the good use of the will, which is virtue, is also from God and
is numbered among the great goods. Mention was then made
of the misery, inflicted in all justice upon sinners, from which
they are freed by God's grace, for man could fall of himself,
that is, by his free will, but could not rise again. Ignorance
and difficulty, which all men suffer from the moment of
birth, belong to that misery arising from man's just condem-
nation, and no one is freed from this evil except by the grace
of God. Through their denial of original sin, the Pelagians
refuse to admit that this misery derives from a just condem-
nation. Nevertheless, even though ignorance and difficulty
were the original and natural condition of man, God should
not be blamed but praised, as I argued in that same third
book. This discussion must be regarded as directed against
the Manichees, who do not accept the Sacred Scriptures of
the Old Testament, where original sin is recounted. And
these have the wicked effrontery to contend that whatever we
read about original sin in the Letters of the Apostles has been
inserted by corrupters of the Scriptures, as if it were something
the Apostles never said. But against the Pelagians we must
defend what is set forth in both parts of the Scripture, which
they profess to accept.

This work opens with the words: “Tell me, please, whether
God is not the cause of evil."
GRACE AND FREE WILL

(De gratia et libero arbitrio)
INTRODUCTION

HE TREATISE Grace and Free Will marks the beginning
of a new and final phase in Saint Augustine's long
1 4 and tireless polemic on the subject of divine grace.
Between the years of 412 and 420, he had devoted no fewer
than nine works, exclusive of pertinent sermons and letters,
to a refutation of the Pelagian errors? and to a defense of the
Church's traditional teaching on the necessity and absolute
gratuity of grace in the work of man's salvation. In fact, it was
largely through his personal efforts and intervention that these
errors were condemned by more than two hundred and forty
bishops at the Council of Carthage in 418. Later that same
year the Council's action was confirmed by Pope Zosimus in
his celebrated Epistola Tractoria? which was endorsed by
nearly the entire episcopate. Although Augustine emerged
victorious from the controversy, further difficulties arose later
from a new and unexpected source.

In the same year that witnessed the condemnation of
Pelagianism, Augustine had addressed a letter to the Roman
priest Sixtus,* later Pope Sixtus III, in which he outlined the
errors of Pelagius and defended the doctrine that no merit

1 These include the following works: De peccatorum meritis el remis-
sione et de baptismo parvulorum, De spiritu et littera, De natura
et gratia, De natura et origine animae, Contra duas epistolas Pela-
gianorum, De perfectione iustitiae hominis, De gestis Pelagii, De gratia
Christi et de peccato originali, De nuptiis et concupiscentia.

2 The best modern and comprehensive study of Pelagius is that of
G. de Plinval, Pélage: ses écrits, sa vie, et sa réforme (Lausanne 1943).
Cf. also J. Ferguson, Pelagius: A Historical and Theological Study
(Cambridge 1956).

3 Only fragments of the Epistola survive, including that found in
Augustine’s letter to Optatus (190.23).

4 Ep. 194.

245

246 SAINT AUGUSTINE

whatever is possible without grace, even to the point of assert-
ing that "in crowning our merits, God does nothing more
than crown His own gifts." Several years later, probably in
426, a copy of this letter fell into the hands of Florus, a monk
of the community at Hadrumetum,® during a visit to the
monastery in his native city of Uzala, presided over by Bishop
Evodius.6 A copy of the letter was dictated to Florus who
had it brought back to Hadrumetum, while Florus him-
self went on to Carthage." Unknown to the superior, Valen-
tine, the letter was read to uninstructed members of the com-
munity. Some denied its authenticity; others opposed its con-
tents as altogether incompatible with their personal efforts
in the voluntary practice of virtue. Upon his return to Had-
rumetum Florus informed Valentine of the dissension oc-
casioned by Augustine's letter. While the dissenters numbered
only five or more, Valentine resolved to restore peace and
unity by seeking clarification of the letter. He turned first
to Evodius, but when the latter's reply failed to satisfy the
monks? he addressed himself to a highly respected priest,
Sabinus, whose efforts were apparently also unavailing. As a
last resort, Valentine permitted two of the monks opposed to
Augustine's teaching, Felix and Cresconius, to journey to
Hippo with the controversial letter. While providing them
with the necessary funds, he gave them no introductory letters
so as not to appear sympathetic to their views. Actually,

5 The present-day city of Sousse in Tunisia.

6 A native of Tagaste, Evodius was present at the death of Monica at
Ostia and later became a member of Augustine's first community at
Tagaste. After Augustine's ordination to the priesthood at Hippo in
391, he joined the community established there on property donated
for the purpose by Bishop Valerius. In two of Augustine's Dialogues,
The Greatness of ihe Soul and The Free Choice of the Will, he serves
as interlocutor.

7 The main events of this episode are described in two letters of Augus-
tine to Valentine (Epp. 214, 25 and in Valentine's reply, (Ep. 216).

8 The complete text of Evodius' letter, first published by Dom Morin
in 1896, was re-edited by him in 1901 (Revue bénédictine 18.241-256);
this second edition is reprinted in A. Hamman (ed), Migne,
Patrologia Latina: Supplementum 2 (Paris 1960) 382-834.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 247

Valentine, as well as the community at large, acknowledged
both the authenticity of the letter and the orthodoxy of its
contents, The monks were joined sometime later at Hippo by
the same Felix who had dictated the copy of Augustine's letter
to Sixtus at Uzala and brought it to Hadrumetum.

Because of the monks’ desire to return to their own mon-
astery for Easter, Augustine supplemented his oral explana-
tions with a more detailed account in a letter to Valentine,
which he read to them. Finally, when the monks agreed to
remain for Easter, he reviewed with them various documents
which had exposed and condemned the Pelagian heresy.
These included, in addition to a second and shorter letter to
Valentine, letters sent to Pope Innocent concerning the
Councils of Carthage and Numidia, as well as the lengthier
account submitted by five of the bishops, including the Pope's
reply; also, the report of the Council of Africa sent to Pope
Zosimus, together with his reply in the Epistola Tractoria,
and a report of the anti-Pelagian measures adopted by the
recent plenary Council of Africa. He also read them his latest
treatise, Grace and Free Will, addressed to Valentine, and
composed during the monks’ sojourn at Hippo. In reply to
Augustine's two letters, Valentine assures him that the treatise
has happily achieved the desired result of restoring peace and
harmony in the community.

As Augustine points out at the beginning of this work, and
again in a brief account of it in the Retractations? the
treatise is specifically directed against those who regard any
defense of grace as a denial of free will, which they boldly
defend at the expense of grace, asserting that this is given
according to our merits. Because of the Saint's insistence and
emphasis upon the radical insufficiency of man's will to merit
the first grace and to persevere until death without the
gratuitous assistance of God's grace, the work may properly
be regarded as the first to be occasioned by the rising tide

9 2.66.
248 SAINT AUGUSTINE

of Semi-Pelagianism,!? which was to occupy the rest of his
declining years.

No exact date can be assigned for the composition of Grace
and Free Will. Since, however, it occupies the second last
place in the chronological ordering of the Retractations, com-
pleted in 427, it was most probably composed during the
Easter period of 426 or 427.

The present translation has been made from the text of
the Maurist (Benedictine) Edition, as reproduced in J. P.
Migne's Patrologia Latina 44.

10 Until the late sixteenth century the doctrinal errors attributed to
Cassian, the monks of Marseilles, and Faustus of Riez, were designated
collectively as Massilienses and Pelagianorum reliquiae. The term
“Semi-Pelagianism,” employed for the first time during the celebrated
controversy, De auxiliis, came into general usage only after the first
years of the seventeenth century.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 249

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

Text and Translations:
Maurist Edition: Sancti Augustini Hipponensis episcopi Opera 10
(Paris 1696) 717-744. Reproduced, with few variants, by:
Migne, J. P. Patrologia Latina 44 (Paris 1861) 881-912.

Chéné, intard, J. Sur ἴα grdce et libre arbitre (Bibliotheque
‘Augustinienne: Oeuvres de saint Augustin 24 [Paris 1962]
207; 769-788).

Galati, L. La grazia e il libero arbitrio (Rome 1959).

Holmes, P.— Wallis, R. "On Grace and Free Will,” in Dods, M. (ed),
The Works of Aurelius Augustine 15 (The Anti-Pelagian Works
of St. Augustine 8; Edinburgh 1876) 13-67.

Kopp, $; Aurelius Augustinus, Schriften gegen die Semipelagianer,
lateinisch-deutsch: Gnaden und freier Wille, Zurechtweisung und
Gnade (Würzburg 1955).

Vega, G. de, De la Gracia y del libre albedrio (Biblioteca de Autores
Gristianos 50: Obras de San Agustin 6 [2 ed. Madrid 1966] 225-
01).

Secondary Works:

Bovy, L. Grace et liberté chez saint Augustin (Montreal 1938).

Chéné, J. La théologie de saint Augustin: Gráce et prédestination (Le
Puy-Lyon 1961).

La Bonnardiére, A’ M. "Quelques remarques sur les citations scrip-
turaires du ‘De gratia ei libero arbitrio" Revue des études
augustiniennes 9 (1963) 77-85.

Léon-Dufour, X. “Grace et libre arbitre chez saint Augustin," Recher-
ches de science religieuse 30 (1940) 129-163.

Rondet, H. "La théologie de la grace dans la correspondance de
saint Augustin,” Recherches Augustiniennes 1 (1958) 808-815.
Sage, A. “‘Preparatur voluntas a Domino, " Revue des études augus-

tiniennes 10 (1964) 1-20.
GRACE AND FREE WILL
Chapter 1

1, So far as the Lord has deigned to assist me, I have al-
ready examined and set down a number of things in writing!
on account of men who so extol and defend man’s free will
that they dare to deny and attempt to do away with the grace
of God whereby we are called to Him and are delivered from
our evil merits, and through which we acquire good merits
enabling us to reach eternal life. But seeing that there are
some who so defend God's grace that they deny man’s free
will, or who think that free will is being denied when grace
is defended, I have taken care, impelled by our charity for one
another, to address something on this matter to your Charity,
brother Valentine, and to the rest of you, who serve God
together.

Reports about you have reached me, brethren, by some in
your community who have come to us and by whom we have
forwarded this writing, that there are dissensions among you
on this subject? Accordingly, dearly beloved, I would first
of all admonish you to give thanks to God for what you
understand so you will not be confused by the abstruse nature
of the question at hand; but as for whatever is still beyond
reach of your mind, pray for understanding from the Lord,
while preserving at the same time peace and charity one with
another. And until He Himself leads you to grasp what you
do not yet understand, walk along that way which has enabled
you to reach this goal. This is the admonition given by the

1 Cf. Introduction, p. 245, n. 1.
2 Cf. Introduction, p. 246f.
250
GRACE AND FREE WILL 251

Apostle Paul who, after having said he was not yet perfect?
went on to add a little later: “Let us then, as many as are
perfect, be of this mind.” That is to say, we are perfect only
to the extent that we have not yet come to that perfection
which is in store for us, The Apostle goes on to add at once:
“And if in any point you are minded otherwise, this also
God will reveal to you."5 Nevertheless, let us follow that path
which has brought us to our present goal. As a matter of fact,
by walking according to what we have attained, we shall,
with God’s revelation to us, be able to reach what we have
not yet attained if we are otherwise minded, provided we do
not forsake all that He has already revealed.

Chapter 2

2. Now He has revealed through His Sacred Scriptures
that there exists in man the free choice of the will. I will
show how He has revealed this, not in the language of men,
but in that of God. First of all, the commandments of God
themselves would be of no avail to man unless he had the
free choice of the will whereby by fulfilling them he could
attain the promised reward. For they were given so that man
might have no excuse on the score of ignorance, as the Lord
says in the Gospel with reference to the Jews: “If I had not
come and spoken to them, they would have no sin. But now
they have no excuse for their sin."! To what sin does He refer
but to that heinous sin which He foreknew would be theirs
even as He was so speaking, namely, that by which they
would put Him to death? For until Christ had come to them
in the flesh, they had no sin. The Apostle likewise says: “The
wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness
“8 Cf. Phil. 3.12.

4 Phil. 3.15.
5 Phil 6.

1 John 15.22.

252 SAINT AUGUSTINE

and wickedness of those men who in wickedness hold back
the truth; seeing that what may be known about God is
manifest to them. For God has manifested it to them. For
since the creation of the world his invisible attributes are
clearly seen—His everlasting power also and divinity—being
understood through the things that are made. And so they
are without excuse."? How does he mean that they are “with-
out excuse,” except by reference to a kind of excuse that
usually prompts human pride to voice such protestations as:
“Tf I had only known, I would have done it, and consequently
I did not do so because I did not know better"; or, “If I only
knew how, I would do it, and therefore I do not do so because
I do not know how"? This kind of excuse is taken away from
them when a precept is given or when the knowledge of
how to avoid sin is made clear to them.

8. But there are men who even try to use God himself to
excuse themselves, It is to such that the Apostle says: "Let
no one say when he is tempted, that he is tempted by God;
for God is no tempter to evil, and he himself tempts no one.
But everyone is tempted by being drawn away and enticed
by his own passion. Thus when passion has conceived, it
brings forth sin; but when sin has matured, it begets death."*
In a similar vein Solomon's Book of Proverbs has the answer
for those who would use God Himself to excuse themselves:
“The folly of a man supplants his steps, and he frets in his
mind against God."* And the Book of Ecclesiasticus has this
to say: “Say not: It is through God that I fell away; for you
ought not to do the things that he hates. And do not say: He
has caused me to err, for he has no need of the sinful man.
The Lord hates all abomination, and they that fear God
shall not love it. God made man from the beginning and left
him in the hand of his counsel . . . If you are willing, you
will keep the commandments and fulfill faithfully his good

2 Rom. 1.18-20.
3 James 1.18, 15.
4 193.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 253

pleasure. He has set water and fire before you: stretch forth
your hand to whatever you will. Before man is life and death
... whatever he shall choose shall be given him."5 There we
have a perfectly clear statement of the free choice of the
human will.

4. What of this fact, that God in so many passages com-
mands that all His precepts be kept and carried out? How
can He command if there is no free choice? And what of that
"blessed man" about whom the Psalmist says that "his will
has been according to the law of the Lord"?9 Does he not make
it perfectly clear that it is by the will that a man takes his
stand on the side of God's law? Finally, there are many com-
mandments that in one way or another refer by name to the
will. For example: “Be not overcome by evil, but overcome
evil with good."7 And there are similar passages, such as: “Do
not become like the horse and the mule, who have no undér-
standing";? and, “Do not cast off the counsels of thy mother";?
and, “Be not wise in your own conceit";!? and, “Do not fall
away from the correction of the Lord";!! and, “Neglect not
the law";!? and, "Do not refrain from helping the needy";1*
and, “Plan no evil against thy friends";!* and, “Mind not the
deceit of a woman" ;15 and, “He would not understand that he
might do well";!6 and, "They were unwilling to take correc-
tion.”17 What do such numerous passages from the Books of
the Old Testament show, except that man's will is possessed
of free choice?

5 15.11-17.
6 Ps. 1.2.

254 SAINT AUGUSTINE

The Books of the New Testament also, composed by the
Evangelists and Apostles, what other lesson do they teach us
where they say: “Do not lay up for yourself treasures on
earth” ;18 and, “Do not be afraid of those who kill the body";!9
and, “If anyone wishes to come after me, let him deny him-
self";? and, "Peace on earth among men of good will"??t
And the Apostle Paul says: "Let him do what he will, he
does not sin if he should marry. But he who stands firm in
his heart, being under no constraint, but is free to carry out
his own will, and has decided to keep his virgin—he does
well."22 The Apostle likewise declares: “If I do this willingly,
1 have a reward";? and in another passage: "Be sober as just
men, and do not sin."?* And again, “. . . so that your readi-
ness to begin may be equalled by your desire to carry it
through."25 And writing to Timothy, he says: ". . . for when
they [young widows] have wantonly turned away from
Christ, they wish to marry";?* and, in another place: “And
all who wish to live piously in Christ Jesus will suffer perse-
cution."?? And, addressing Timothy himself, he says: "Do not
neglect the grace that is in you.”28 And addressing himself to
Philemon, he says: “. . . that your kindness may not be as it
were of necessity, but voluntary. He even admonished
slaves themselves to give service to their masters “from the
heart, with a good will."3? In a similar vein, Saint James says:
“Therefore, my brethren, do not err . . . and do not join
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ to partiality towards persons,”3t

18 Matt. 6.19.
19 Matt. 10.28.
20 Matt. 16.24.
21 Luke 2.14.
32 1 Cor. 7.36-37.
23 1 Cor. 9.17.
24 1 Cor. 15-34.
25 ] Cor. 8.11.
26 1 Tim. 5.11.
27 2 Tim. 3.12.
28 1 Tim. 4.14.
29 Philem. 14.
30 Eph. 6.67.
31 James 2.1.

GRACE AND FREE WILL 255

and, “Do not speak against one another."9? And Saint John
writes in his Epistle: “Do not love the world,” as well as
other testimonies of a like nature.

Now wherever there is the express statement not to do this
or that, and whenever the performance of the will is required
to do or refrain from some action, in keeping with God’s
commandments, that is sufficient proof of the free choice of
the will. Let no man, therefore, blame God in his heart when-
ever he sins, but let him impute the sin to himself. Nor does
the fact that something is done in accordance with God’s will
transfer such an act from one’s own will. Indeed, when one
does it of his own free will, then it deserves to be called
a good work and one for which we are to expect a reward
from Him of whom it is said that “He will render to every-
one according to his deeds.”34

Chapter 8

5. Any excuse that men are wont to allege on grounds of
ignorance is taken away from those who know the command-
ments of God. But neither will they be without punishment
who are ignorant of God's law. “For whoever have sinned
without the law, will perish without the law; and whoever
have sinned under the law, will be judged by the law.”1 I do
not think that the Apostle meant to say that those who sin in
ignorance will suffer worse punishment than those who
know the law. It would seem that it is worse to perish than
to be judged. But as the Apostle was speaking here of the
Gentiles and of the Jews, since the former are without the
law while the latter have received it, how can anyone dare
say that those Jews who sin under the law will not perish?
82 James 4.11.

38 1 John 9.15.
84 Matt. 16.27.

1 Rom. 2.12.
256 SAINT AUGUSTINE

For they have not believed in Christ, and it has been said of
them that “they shall be judged by the law.” For without faith
in Christ no man can be set free, and consequently they will
perish by the judgment.

Now if those ignorant of the law are in a worse condition
than those who know the law, how can this saying of our Lord
in the Gospel be true: "That servant who knows not his
master's will and did things deserving of stripes, will be beaten
with few. But that servant who knows his master's will and
did things deserving of stripes, will be beaten with many
stripes"?? As you see, this passage shows clearly that a man
who knows sins more gravely than one who does not know.
But we must not on this account take refuge in the dark-
ness of ignorance so as to find there an excuse for our con-
duct. Not to know is one thing, unwillingness to know is
another. The will is surely at fault in the kind of man of
whom it is said that "He would not understand that he might
do well."$ But even the ignorance that is found, not in those
unwilling to learn, but in those who, so to speak, simply do
not know, is not such as to excuse anyone from the punish-
ment of everlasting fire, even if his unbelief resulted from
his never having heard what he should believe; but his suffer-
ing may perhaps be somewhat mitigated. For there was reason
for the Psalmist to say: “Pour out your wrath upon the
nations that know you not.”4 And the Apostle says that
*, . . he will come in flaming fire to inflict punishment on
those who do not know God."5 Nevertheless so that no one of
us may say, "I did not know," "TI did not hear," "I did not
understand," the human will is cited to show that we can
have this very knowledge of God where it says: “Do not be-
come like the horse and the mule which have no under-
standing."* But worse is the state of that man of whom it is

2 Luke 1248, 47
3 Ps. 354.
4 Ps. 78.6.
5 1 Thess. 1.7-8.
6 Ps. 81.9.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 257

said: “The stubborn slave will not be corrected by words;
for even if he understands, he will not obey." But when a
man says: “I cannot do what is commanded because I am
overcome by my concupiscence,” he no longer has ignorance
for an excuse; neither does he blame God in his heart, but
he acknowledges his inner evil state and grieves over it. Yet,
it is to such a one that the Apostle says: “Be not overcome
by evil, but overcome evil with good."5 And it is certainly the
freedom of the will that is being cited whenever someone is
told: "Be not overcome by evil" For, to be willing or un-
willing has to do with each man's will.

Chapter 4

6. But one should be wary lest all such scriptural testi-
monies in defense of free will (and there are doubtless many
others) be so construed as to leave no place for God's help and
grace in leading a good and upright life deserving of an
eternal reward. There is the added danger that when a man,
miserable as he is, is leading a good life and doing good, or
rather, when he imagines he is doing so, he will dare to glory
in himself and not in the Lord and put his hope for a good
life in himself, thus incurring the curse of the Prophet Jere-
mia where he says: "Cursed be the man that trusts in man,
and makes strong the flesh of his arm, and whose heart departs
from the Lord.”?

You must understand, brethren, these words of the Prophet.
Because he did not say: “Cursed be the man that trusts in
himself,” some one might suppose that the words, “Cursed be
the man that trusts in man,” meant that no one should place
his hope in any other man, but in himself. It was, then, to
7 Prov. 29.19.

8 Rom. 12.21.

1 Jer. 17.5.
258 SAINT AUGUSTINE

clarify his admonition that man should not put his trust even
in himself that, following his statement that man should not
put his trust even in himself, the Prophet immediately added
the words: "And make strong the flesh of his arm." By "arm"
he meant the "power to act," while the term “flesh” must be
understood as “human frailty.” Hence a man "makes strong
the flesh of his arm" when he judges that a poor weak power,
namely, a human power, is sufficient of itself to do good and
does not place his hope in help from the Lord. This was why
the Prophet added the words: "and whose heart departs from
the Lord." This is the teaching of the Pelagians, which is not an
old heresy but one that sprang up not so long ago. After a
rather lengthy polemic against this heresy, the matter came
before the councils of the bishops as a last resort. I have
forwarded you the Proceedings of some of these, but not of all,
for your perusal.? Let us, then, not put our hope in man in
the performance of good so as to make strong the flesh of our
arm, and let our heart not depart from the Lord, but rather
turn to Him and say: "Be thou my helper, forsake me not;
do not despise me, O God, my Savior.”

7. So, dearly beloved, let us also see what testimonies there
are from revelation having to do with grace, without which
we are incapable of doing good, just as we have shown
from the scriptural testimonies above that there is the power
of free choice in man for living a good life and for doing good.
And I shall first of all say something about the life itself
which you profess; for unless you felt a contempt for the
pleasures of marriage, you would not even be gathered
together in the kind of community where you lead a life of
continence. Now it was while the Lord was speaking in this
vein and when the disciples remarked to Him: “If the case
of a man with his wife is so, it is not expedient to marry,”
that He replied: “Not all accept this teaching, but those

2 CE. Ep. 215.
3 Ps. 26.9.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 259

to whom it has been given."* And when the Apostle said to
Timothy: “Keep yourself chaste,”> was it not to his free will
that he appealed? In this same connection, he also pointed
to the power of the will where he says: “Being under no
constraint, but free to carry out his own will to keep his
virgin.”6 And yet, "not all accept this teaching, but those to
whom it has been given." As for those to whom it is not given,
they either do not will it or they fail to carry out what they
will; whereas those to whom it is given are of such a will they
carry out what they will. That this teaching, therefore, which
all do not accept, be accepted by some, is a matter both of
God's gift and of man's free choice.

8. In a further reference to conjugal chastity itself, the
Apostle says expressly: "Let him do what he will; he does not
sin if he should marry." But this too is God's gift, as the
Scriptures say: "It is by the Lord that the woman is joined
to her husband." So it is that the Teacher of the Gentiles
commends by his words both conjugal chastity, which excludes
adultery, and a more perfect kind of chastity which rules out
the desire for intercourse, while showing that the former and
the latter are both the gift of God. Writing to the Corinthians,
he also admonishes married couples not to deprive one another
of the marriage debt, though, following this warning, he went
on to say: "Yet I would that you all were as I am myself";
for he himself refrained indeed from all intercourse. He then
proceeded to say: “But each one has his own gift from God,
one in this way, and another in that."9

What else but free will is indicated by these many precepts
in God's law which forbid the commission of fornication and
adultery? For these precepts would not be given unless man
possessed a will of his own whereby to obey God's command-

4 Matt. 19.10-11.
5 1 Tim. 5.22.

6 1 Cor. 7.37.

7 1 Cor. 7.86.

8 Prov. 9.14.

9 1Cor. 77.
260 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ments. And yet, without this gift of God it is impossible to
obey the precepts of chastity. That is why the Writer declares
in the Book of Wisdom: “And as I knew that I could not
otherwise be continent, except God gave it, this also was a
matter of wisdom, to know whose gift it was,"!? On the
other hand, "everyone is tempted by being drawn away and
enticed by his own passion’! so that he fails to observe the
holy precepts of chastity. If someone should say of these
commandments: "I will to observe them but I am overcome
by my concupiscence," the Scripture will address to his will
the very reply I mentioned above: “Be not overcome by evil,
but overcome evil with good."? But it is grace that helps
to achieve this, and, unless we are assisted by grace, the law
will only be a power of sin. Unless we have the spirit of grace
to assist us, concupiscence is increased and strengthened by
the law and its prohibitions. This is the very thing which the
Teacher of the Gentiles says Himself: “Now the sting of death
is sin, and the power of sin is the law."13 Now you see why a
man will say: “I will to observe the commandment, but I am
overcome by the power of my concupiscence." Even when his
will is called into play and he is told: "Be not overcome by
evil" what good is this to him unless the command can be
carried out with the help of grace?

The Apostle himself added this as a sequel when, having
said that “the power of sin is the law,” he immediately added
these words: “But thanks be to God who has given us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ."!* Consequently, even
the victory by which we are able to overcome sin is nothing
other than the gift of God who assists our free will in such
a struggle.

9. This is why our heavenly Master also says: “Watch and

10 821.

11 James 1.14.
12 Rom. 1221.
13 1 Cor. 15.56.
14 1 Cor. 1557.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 261

pray that you enter not into temptation."!5 In the struggle
then against his concupiscence, let each one pray that he
enter not into temptation, that is to say, let him pray not to
be drawn away and enticed by this concupiscence. Now if a
person overcomes concupiscence by a good will, he does not
enter into temptation. But man's free will is not enough un-
less he is given the victory by the Lord in answer to his prayer
that he be not led into temptation. In fact, what clearer
evidence is there for pointing to God's grace than in the case
where we receive what we ask for in prayer? For if our Lord
had said: "Watch that you enter not into temptation," He
would appear to have merely given an admonition to man's
will, whereas when He added the words "and pray," He made
it clear that it is God who helps us so that we do not fall into
temptation. It is to man's free will that these words have
been directed: "Son, do not fall away from the correction of
the Lord."!$ And the Lord says: "I have prayed for thee,
Peter, that thy faith may not fail"! Man, then, is aided by
grace so that commands are not imposed upon his will to
no purpose.

Chapter 5

10. When God says: “Turn to me . . . and I will turn to
you,”! the one part, namely, that we turn to Him, apparently
pertains to the will, while the other, namely, that He Him-
self will also turn to us, refers to His grace. The Pelagians
may think they find support in this passage for their view
that God's grace is given according to our merits. Indeed,
Pelagius himself did not dare make such an assertion when
his cause was being heard by the bishops in the Fast, namely,
15 Matt. 2641.

16 Prov. $.11.
17 Luke 22.32.

1 Zach. 1.3.

262 SAINT AUGUSTINE

in Palestine where Jerusalem is located. This charge too,
among others, was made against him, that he declared that
God's grace is given according to our merits. Such a view is
so foreign to Catholic teaching and so destructive of Christ’s
grace that unless Pelagius had anathematized the view charged
to him, he would himself have gone out from the Council
under anathema. That Pelagius pronounced this anathema in
bad faith is plainly shown in his later works in which he ab-
solutely defends this view, that God's grace is given according
to our merits. The Pelagians cull passages from the Scriptures
such as the one I mentioned awhile ago—"Turn to me...
and I will turn to you”—to show that it is according to our
merits for turning to God that He gives us that grace by
which He Himself also turns to us. Those who hold this view
fail to observe that unless this turning of ours to God were
itself also a gift, we could not say to Him: “Ὁ God of hosts,
convert us";? and, “Thou wilt turn, O God, and bring us to
life"; and, “Convert us, O God, our Saviour.”4 And there are
other similar passages too numerous to mention. For cer-
tainly, this coming of ours to Christ simply means that we
turn to Him through belief. And yet He tells us that "No one
can come to me unless it be given him by my Father."5

11. There is this similar passage in the Second Book of
Paralipomenon that certainly gives evidence of the freedom of
the will: “The Lord is with you because you are with Him.
If you seek Him, you shall find; but if you forsake Him, He
will forsake you."$ But those who assert that grace is given
according to our merits take these testimonies to mean that

2 A reference to the Council of some thirteen bishops at Diospolis sum-
moned at the end of 415 by the Primate of Palestine, Eulogius, at
which Pelagius was obliged to answer charges brought against his
teaching on grace by two exiled Gallican bishops, Heros of Arles and
Lazarus of Aix. In the absence of his accusers and by skillful evasions,
Pelagius succeeded in avoiding condemnation.

3 That is, "turn us."

4 Ps. 84.7, 5.

5 John 6.66.

6 2 Par. 15.2.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 263

our merit consists in our being present with God, while the
grace conferred according to our merit results in this, that
God Himself also becomes present with us. Likewise, that
our merit consists in seeking God and that the grace to find
Him is given us according to such merit, And in the First
Book of Paralipomenon there is this passage which clearly
indicates the freedom of the will: “And thou my son Solomon,
know thy God and serve Him with a perfect heart and a
willing mind; for the Lord searches all hearts and understands
all the thoughts of minds. If you shall seek Him, you shall
find Him; but if you forsake Him, He will cast you off for-
ever.”? But the Pelagians base their opinion of man's merit
on this expression: “If you seek Him,” and find support for
their view that grace is given according to such merit from
the expression: “Thou shalt find Him.” And they do their
utmost to show that grace is given according to our merits,
namely, that grace is not grace. For, as the Apostle so clearly
expresses it, where a return is made according to merit, “the
reward is not credited as a favor, but as something due."5
12. Certainly, merit was found in the Apostle Paul, but
while he was persecuting the Church, it was evil. Hence his
own avowal: “I am not worthy to be called an Apostle because
I persecuted the Church of God."? So it was while he possessed
this evil merit that good merit was given him in return for
his evil merit. That is why he went on to say: “But by the
grace of God I am what I am.” And, in order to show that
there is also free will, he at once added: "And His grace in
me has not been fruitless, but I have labored more abundant-
ly than all of them."!? He does, in fact, exhort man’s freedom
also in others where he says to them: “We entreat you not to
receive the grace of God in vain."!! How, indeed, could he
make this plea if their reception of grace were to result in
264 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the loss of their own will? Nevertheless, so that it might not
be supposed. that the will is itself capable of anything good
without the grace of God just because he had said: “His grace
in me has not been fruitless, but I have labored more
abundantly than all of them,” he at once added: “yet not I,
but the grace of God with me";?? that is to say, it is not I, but
the grace of God that is with me. Accordingly, it was neither
grace alone nor he himself alone, but the grace of God and
himself together. It was by God's grace alone, however, that
he was called by a voice from heaven and was converted by so
great and efficacious a call, seeing that his merits, though
great, were evil. Elsewhere, too, he says to Timothy: “Enter
into my sufferings for the Gospel through the power of God.
He has redeemed us and called us with a holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
the grace which was granted us in Christ Jesus.”1% Similarly,
recalling those merits which were his own, but evil, he
declares: “For we ourselves also were once unwise, unbeliev-
ing, going astray, slaves to various lusts and pleasures, living
in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another."!* What
recompense, indeed, was there for such evil merits, but punish-
ment? But as God renders good for evil through grace, which
is not given according to our merits, that was accomplished
which he then went on to describe in these words: “But when
the goodness and kindness of God our Saviour appeared, not
by reason of good works that we did ourselves, but according
to his mercy, he saved us by the bath of regeneration and
renewal by the Holy Spirit, whom he has abundantly poured
out upon us through Jesus Christ our Saviour, in order that,
justified by his grace, we may be heirs in the hope of life ever-
lasting."15

12 1 Cor. 15.10.
13 2 Tim. 1.8-9.
14 Titus 3.8.

15 Titus 84-7.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 265

Chapter 6

18. We prove by these and similar testimonies of Sacred
Scripture that God's grace is not given according to our merits.
We see, in fact, that it is given, and continues to be given
daily, not only where there are no good merits, but also where
there are many previous merits that are evil. But it is when
grace is unmistakably given that even our own merits begin
to be good, though only because of grace. For if it is with-
drawn, man falls, and he is not raised up by his free will, but
rather cast down. So even when a man begins to possess good
merits, he ought not to ascribe them to himself but to God,
to whom the Psalmist says: “Be thou my helper, forsake me
not.” When he says “forsake me not," he makes it plain that
if he were forsaken, he would be incapable of any good by
himself. This is why he also declared: “And in my abundance
I said: I shall never be moved,"? for he had judged that to
be his own whereby he so abounded that he would never be
moved. But in order to show him whose good it was whereof
he was beginning to boast, as if it were his own, he was
reminded by the gradual withdrawal of grace to avow: “O
Lord, in thy favor thou gavest strength to my beauty. Thou
turnest away thy face from me, and I became troubled.” Con-
sequently, man has need of God’s grace not only to be made
just when he is wicked, when he is changed, that is, from a
wicked to a just man, and when he is given good in return for
evil, but grace must accompany him, and he must lean on it
in order not to fall. This is why it is written of the Church
in the Canticle of Canticles: "Who is this that cometh up clad
in white, leaning upon her kinsman?’ For she who could not
do this of herself has been made white. And who has made
her white but Him who says by the prophet: “I£ your sins be
266 SAINT AUGUSTINE

as scarlet, they shall be made white as snow"? She was not
gaining any good merit then at the time she was made white.
But now that she has been made white, she walks aright,
provided only that she continues to lean upon Him who made
her white. Accordingly, Jesus Himself, upon whom the Church
leans, now that she has been made white, said to His disciples:
“Without me you can do nothing."*

14. Let us then return to the Apostle Paul who, as we have
certainly seen, obtained the grace of God, who gives good in
return for evil merit. Let us see what he has to say as he
nears death when, writing to Timothy, he declares: "As for
me, I am already being poured out in sacrifice, and the time
of my deliverance is at hand. I have fought the good fight, I
have finished the course, I have kept the faith."* He recounts
these good merits as indeed his own and, just as after his
evil merits he had obtained grace, so now, after his good
merits, he may obtain the crown. And take note finally of what
follows: "For the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of
justice which the Lord, the just Judge, will give to me in
that day.”® To whom could he give a crown, if the merciful
Father had not given his grace? And how could this be a
"crown of justice" unless grace, which makes the wicked just,
had gone before? And how could the crown be given as due
recompense unless grace had first been given freely?

15. But when the Pelagians contend that the only grace not
given according to our merits is that which remits man's
sins? whereas final grace, namely, eternal life, is awarded in
return for previous merits, they must not go unanswered. If,
in fact, their understanding of our merits is such that they
know that even these are God's gifts, there would be nothing
5 Isa. 1.18.

6 John 15.5.

7 2 Tim. 46-7,

8 2 Tim. 48.

9 At the Council of Diospolis, Pelagius had formally repudiated thc
view attributed to his companion, Celestius, that pardon is granted to

penitent sinners through their merits rather than by the grace and
mercy of God. Cf. De gestis Pelagii 35.65.

GRACE AND FREE WILL 267

reprehensible in such a view. But inasmuch as they so extol
man’s merits as to maintain that man has these of himself,
the Apostle is absolutely right in replying to them: “For what
singles thee out? What hast thou that thou hast not received?
And if thou hast received it, why dost thou boast as if thou
hadst not received it?”}° To a person so-minded, one may say
in all truth that it is His own gifts that God is crowning, and
not your merits, if these merits come from yourself and not
from Him, If they are merits such as these, they are evil and
God does not crown them; and if they are good merits, they
are God's gifts since, according to the Apostle James: “Every
good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down
from the Father of Lights."!! This is also why John, Precursor
of the Lord, says: "No man can receive anything unless it is
given to him from heaven,"? and, indeed, from that heaven
from which the Holy Spirit came when, "having ascended on
high," Jesus led away "captivity captive and gave gifts to
men."13 Consequently, if your good merits are God's gifts,
then He does not crown them as merits of yours, but as gifts
of His own.

Chapter 7

16. Let us next consider those very merits of the Apostle
Paul which he said the just Judge would repay with a “crown
of justice," and see whether his merits are to be reckoned as
his, namely, acquired by and for himself, or whether they arc
gifts of God. “I have fought the good fight,” he says, “I have
finished the course, I have kept the faith."! First of all, those
good works would be nothing at all if they had not been
preceded by good thoughts. Observe then what he says con-
10 1 Cor. 47
1l pes 1

i2 John 3.2"
's. 67.19; Eph. 4.8.

1 2 Tim. 47.

268 SAINT AUGUSTINE

cerning these very thoughts when, writing to the Corinthians,
he says: "Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think any-
thing, as from ourselves, but our sufficiency is from God."?
Next, let us look at his merits one by one. “I have,” he says,
“fought the good fight.” I want to know whether this power
to fight came from himself or was given him from above. But
it is inconceivable that such a great teacher as Paul would not
have known the law of God who says to us in the Book of
Deuteronomy: “Say not in thy heart: My own might and the
strength of my own hand have given me all this power. But
remember the Lord thy God that he hath given thee the
strength to achieve such power."5 And what is to be gained
by a "good fight," unless it is followed by a victory? And who
is it that gives the victory but Him of whom the Apostle says:
“Thanks be to God who has given us the victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ"? And in another passage, right after
he had quoted the words of the Psalm: "Because for thy sake
we are put to death all the day long, and we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter,"5 he went on to say: "Because in all
these things we overcome because of him who has loved us."*
We overcome, therefore, not by ourselves, but through Him
who has loved us.

The next merit he mentioned was this: "I have finished the
course." But this was said by the very man wbo elsewhere
asserts: "So then there is question not of him who wills nor
of him who runs, but of God showing mercy."* There is no
way to turn this sentence around and make it say: “It is a
question not of God showing mercy, but of man's willing and
running"; for anyone who would dare speak this way shows
plainly that he is contradicting the Apostle.

17. The last merit mentioned by the Apostle was this:

Ps. 43.22.
Rom. 8.36-37.

2
c
4 1 Cor. 15.57.
5
6
7 Rom. 9.16.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 269

“I have kept the faith.” But these words were spoken by the
very man who says elsewhere: “I have obtained mercy from
the Lord that I might be faithful.” For he did not say: “I
have obtained mercy because I was faithful,” but rather, “that
I might be faithful,” thereby making it plain that to have
faith itself is only possible through God's mercy and that it
is a gift of God. He teaches the same thing where he says:
"For by grace you have been saved through faith; and that
not of yourselves, for it is the gift of God.”® The Pelagians
might possibly allege that we have received grace because
we have believed, so as to ascribe faith to themselves, and
grace to God. This is why, having said “through faith,” he
added, "and that, not from yourselves, for it is the gift of
God.” Again, so that they might not assert that they had
merited such a gift by their works, the Apostle at once added:
“Not as the outcome of works, lest anyone may boast."!? It
was not that he denied good works, or stripped them of all
value, for he states that God renders to each one according
to his works, but rather, that works come from faith, and
not faith from works. Accordingly, our works of justice come
from Him who is also the source of our faith, about which
it is said: “The just man lives by faith."!!

18. Because they fail to grasp what the Apostle means
where he says: "We reckon that a man is justified by faith
independently of the works of the law,"? some men have
understood him to say that faith is sufficient for man, even
though he lives a bad life and is without good works.?? It is
unthinkable that the “vessel of election" should hold this

8 1 Cor. 7.25 ("faithful," i.e. believing) .

9 Eph. 28.

10 Eph. 2.9.

11 Rom. 1.17.

12 Rom. 3.28.

18 Some years earlier, probably in 418, Augustine composed a short
treatise against this error, De fide et operibus. As he points out in the
Retractations, it was directed against certain members of the laity "who
so divorce Christian faith from good works that they are convinced
that one is able to attain eternal salvation, not, of course, without
faith, but without good works" (2.64).
270 SAINT AUGUSTINE

view. It was he who, upon having stated in a certain passage:
“For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision is of any avail, nor
uncircumcision,” added at once, “but faith which works
through charity.”!* It is this same kind of faith which separates
the faithful ones of God from the unclean devils, since even
these, as the Apostle James says, "believe and tremble,"15
though they do not perform good works. Theirs, then, is not
that faith by which the just man lives, namely, a faith which
so works through charity that God requites it with eternal
life in accordance with its works. But as these same good works
also come from God, who bestows faith and charity upon
us, this same Teacher of the Gentiles has accordingly spoken
of “eternal life” itself as a grace.

Chapter 8

19. A serious problem arises here which demands a solu-
tion, if only the Lord will provide us with it. For if eternal
life is given in return for good works, as the Scripture clearly
indicates where it says that “God will render to everyone
according to his works," then how is it possible for eternal
life to be a grace? For grace is not given in return for works,
but freely, as the Apostle himself testifies: "Now to him who
works, the reward is not credited as a favor but as something
due."? Again, he says: “There is a remnant left, selected out
of grace,” and then adds: “And if out of grace, then not in
virtue of works; otherwise grace is no longer grace.” How,
then, is eternal life “grace,” if it is obtained in virtue of
works? May it be that the Apostle did not call eternal life a
grace? On the contrary, he has said this so plainly that it is
14 Gal. 5.6.

15 James 2.19.

1 Rom. 256.
2 Rom. 44.
3 Rom. 11.5-6.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 271

absolutely impossible to deny it. His words do not need a
man of acute understanding, but one who merely pays atten-
tion. For, having said that “the wages of sin is death,” he
added at once: “But the grace of God is life everlasting in
Christ Jesus our Lord."4

20. In my opinion, no solution for the problem is possible
unless we see that our good works themselves, which enable
us to receive eternal life, are referred to God's grace by reason
of our Lord's words: "Without me you can do nothing."5 In
saying that “by grace you have been saved through faith, and
that, not from yourselves, for it is the gift of God; not as the
outcome of works, lest anyone may boast,"9 the Apostle him-
self certainly saw that men might construe his words to mean
that good works are not necessary for believers, but that faith
alone is sufficient for them. Again, he also saw that men might
possibly boast of their good works as if they were sufficient
of themselves to perform them, and that is why he im-
mediately added these words: "For we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus in good works, which God has made
ready beforehand that we may walk in them."*

Why is it that in commending God's grace the Apostle
should say: "Not as the outcome of works, lest anyone may
boast," and then give as a reason: "For we are his workman-
ship, created in Christ Jesus in good works"? How, then, are
we to understand the expression, "not as the outcome of works,
lest anyone may boast"? Pay attention now and try to grasp
the import of the expression, "not as the outcome of works."
"These refer to works that come from yourself, as your own,
and not to those in which God has molded you, namely,
works in which God has formed and created you. It is of
these latter that the Apostle says: "We are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus in good works." He was not speaking

272 SAINT AUGUSTINE

of that creation whereby we were made men, but of a creation
whereof the Psalmist, who was fully a man, spoke when he
said: “Create a clean heart in me, O God,"* and of which the
Apostle says: “If then any man is in Christ, he is a new
creature: the former things have passed away; behold they
are made new! But all things are from God."? It follows then
that we are molded, that is, formed and created, in good
works which we ourselves have not prepared but “which
God has made beforehand that we may walk in them.” It
follows, my dearly beloved, that if our good life is nothing
more than the grace of God, then eternal life, the recompense
for a good life is, without any doubt, also a grace of God;
for it is freely given in recompense for that which has also
been freely given. Now a good life that is so rewarded is
itself simply a grace, whereas eternal life, which is given in
return as a recompense, is a grace given for a grace, a kind of
remuneration, as it were, in accordance with justice. Hence
the truth, as it is indeed a truth, that God “will render to
everyone according to his works."19

Chapter 9

21. But perhaps you will ask whether we have ever read
the expression "grace for grace" in the Scriptures. Now you
have the Gospel according to John, outstanding for its great
clarity, where speaking of Christ the Lord, John the Baptist
says: "And of his fullness we have all received, grace for
grace"! It is, then, from His fullness that we have, each
according to his capacity, received our several portions, so to
speak, that enable us to lead a good life, “according as God

8 Ps. 5.12.

9 2 Cor. 5.17-18.
10 Matt. 16.27; Rom. 2.6.

1 1.16.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 273

has apportioned to each one the measure of faith";? for “each
one has his own gift from God, one in this way, and another
in that."? And this is grace, But, over and above this, we shall
also receive “grace for grace” when we will be given eternal
life, of which the Apostle has said: “But the grace of God is
life everlasting in Christ Jesus our Lord."* He had previously
declared, and rightly so, that the wages of sin is death, seeing
that everlasting death is a kind of payment given in return
for service to the devil. Though he could have said, and
rightly so, that the wages of a just life is life everlasting, he
nevertheless chose to say: “The grace of God is life everlast-
ing,” so we might thus understand that God brings us to
life everlasting, not for any merits of ours, but in accordance
with His mercy. And it is to God that the Psalmist refers
where, addressing his soul, he says: “Who crowns thee with
mercy and compassion."5

But is not this crown given in return for good works? Yes,
but inasmuch as good works in the just are performed by Him
of whom it is said: “For it is God who of his good pleasure
works in you both the will and the performance,"9 this is
why the Psalmist said: "Who crowns you with mercy and
compassion." For it is through His mercy that we perform
the good works for which a crown is given us in return. And
we must not suppose that when he said: "For it is God who
of his good pleasure works in you both the will and the
performance," he was doing away with free will. If such were
the case, he would not have declared previously: "Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling.”? For when they
are given the command "to work," an appeal is made to free
will, whereas the command to do this “with fear and trem-
bling" is given so they will not take credit to themselves
274 SAINT AUGUSTINE

for their good works and become elated over them as if
they were their own. It is almost as if the Apostle, upon being
asked why he had said “with fear and trembling,” had
explained this expression by saying: “For it is God who works
in you.” Indeed, if you are “in fear and trembling,” you will
not be elated as if these were your own good works since it is
God who works in you.

Chapter 10

22. Accordingly, brethren, you should not do evil with
your free will, but good, for this is what the law of God
prescribes in the Sacred Scriptures, both in the Old and New
Testaments. Yes, let us read and try with the Lord’s help to
understand what the Apostle means when he says: “For by
the works of the Law no human being shall be justified before
him, for through law comes the recognition of sin.”! He did
not say the “destruction” of sin, but its “recognition.” Now
when a man comes to a knowledge of sin, the Jaw undoubtedly
works wrath unless man is aided by grace to avoid what he
knows is sinful. This is what the Apostle says in another
place, and these are his own words: “The Law works wrath."?
He said this because God’s wrath is more severe towards a
transgressor who knows sin by the law, and yet commits it.
Such a man is indeed a transgressor of the law, as the Apostle
also remarks in the same passage where he says: “For where
there is no law, neither is there transgression.”? This is why
he also says in another place: “That we may serve in newness
of spirit and not in oldness of letter.”* By “oldness of letter,”
he would have us to understand the law, whereas by “new-
ness of spirit,” nothing else but grace. Furthermore, so that
71 Rom. 8.90. The Vulgate reads ex operibus legis; Aug. ex lege.

2 Rom. 4.15.

8 Rom. 4.15.
4 Rom. 7.6.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 275

no one might think he was blaming the law, or finding fault
with it, he immediately faced the problem by asking: “What
shall we say then? Is the Law sin? By no means!" He then
went on to say: "Yet I did not know sin sdve through the
Law." This is what he stated where he had said: "Through
Law comes the recognition of sin." "For I had not known
lust,” he says, "unless the Law had said: "Thou shalt not lust.’
But sin, having thus found an occasion, worked in me by
means of the commandment all manner of lust, for without
the Law sin was dead. Once upon a time I was living without
law, but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I
died, and the commandment that was unto life was discovered
in my own case to be unto death. For sin, having taken
occasion from the commandment, deceived me, and through
it killed me. So that the Law indeed is holy and the com-
mandment holy and just and good. Did then that which was
good become death to me? By no means! But sin, that it
might be manifest as sin, worked death for me through that
which is good, in order that sin by reason of the command-
ment might become immeasurably sinful.”5 And writing to
the Galatians, he says: "But we know that man is not
justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ. Hence we also believe in Christ Jesus, that we may
be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
Law; because by the works of the Law no man will be
justified. "e

Chapter 11

23. Why, then, do men so utterly vain and perverse as the
Pelagians say that the Law itself is the grace of God which
helps us not to sin? In making this assertion, do they not
unhappily find themselves in contradiction with so great an

5 Rom. 7.7-18.
6 Gal. 2.16.

276 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Apostle, and this beyond the shadow of a doubt? It is he who
says that sin obtained its power against man by the Law and
that it is by the commandment, though this is holy and just
and good, that the Law does nevertheless kill man, bringing
about his death by what is good; also, that man is not de-
livered from this death unless the spirit gives life to him
whom the letter had killed, as he indicates in another passage
where he says: “The letter kills, but the spirit gives life.’
Nevertheless, blind as they are to God’s light and deaf to His
voice, the Pelagians stubbornly maintain that the letter, which
kills, is what gives life and thus go counter to the spirit that
gives life. “Therefore, brethren,” if I may admonish you in
the Apostle's own words, "we are debtors, not to the flesh,
that we should live according to the flesh, for if you live
according to the flesh, you will die; but if by the spirit you
put to death the deeds of the flesh, you will live."? I have
quoted this passage so that I might make use of the Apostle's
words to deter your free will from evil and to exbort it to
what is good. Nor should you on this account glory in man,
that is to say, in yourselves, and not in the Lord, when you are
not living according to the flesh, but are putting to death
by the spirit the deeds of the flesh. So that those to whom he
thus spoke might not be elated by thinking they could per-
form these good works by their own spirit rather than by
God's, because he had said, "but if by the spirit you put to
death the deeds of the flesh," he hastened to add: "For who-
ever are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God."*
So whenever you put to death by the spirit the deeds of the
flesh that you may live, give glory and praise and thanksgiv-
ing to Him by whose spirit you are so led that you can per-
form such works as make it manifest that you are sons of God,
"for whoever are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons
of God."

1 2 Cor. 3.6.
2 Rom. 8.12-13.
3 Rom. 8.14.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 277

Chapter 12

24, As many, therefore, as are led by their own spirit, trust-
ing in their own strength, and assisted only by the law, with-
out grace, are not the sons of God. The same Apostle says
of such men that “.. . being ignorant of the justice of God
and seeking to establish their own, they have not submitted to
the justice of God.”! He said this about the Jews who, because
of their self-confidence, rejected grace and as a result did not
believe in Christ. The Jews, he says, seek to establish a justice
of their own that comes from the Law; not that the Law was
established by them, but rather that they had placed their
justice in the Law which comes from God, by supposing that
they were able of themselves to fulfill this Law. For they were
ignorant of the justice of God, not that justice whereby God
is just, but one that comes to man from God. And that you
may understand why the Apostle asserted that theirs was a
justice coming from the Law, whereas God’s justice comes to
man from God, hear what he has to say in another passage
where, referring to Christ, he declares: “For his sake I have
not only counted all things as loss but I also count them as
dung that I may gain Christ and be found in Him, not having
a justice of my own, which is from the Law, but that which
is from faith in Christ, which is of God."?

Since the Law is not his but God's, what does he mean by
saying, "not having a justice of my own, which is from the
Law," except that, though it comes from the Law, he spoke of
this justice as his own precisely because he supposed he could
fulfill the Law by his own volition without the help of that
grace which comes through faith in Christ? This is why,
having said, "not having a justice of my own, which is from
the Law," he followed with the words, "but that which is
from faith in Christ, which is of God." Such justice was
278 SAINT AUGUSTINE

unknown to those men who, as the Apostle remarks, “are
ignorant of the justice of God,” ignorant, that is, of that
justice which comes from God (not the justice conferred by
the letter that killeth, but by the life-giving spirit); to men
who “seek to establish their own justice” which the Apostle
declared to be of the Law when he said “not having a justice
of my own which is from the Law.” Such men have not
“submitted to the justice of God,” namely, to the grace of
God. For they were living under the Law, not under grace,
and were therefore under the dominion of sin from which
man is freed, not by the Law, but by grace. This is why he
says in another place: “For sin shall not have dominion over
you, since you are not under the Law but under grace."*
It is not that the Law is evil, but that it makes those under it
guilty by giving commands without providing help to fulfill
them. As a matter of fact, grace helps a person to become a
doer of the Law, and, without such grace, a man living under
the Law will be merely a hearer of the Law. Accordingly,
addressing himself to men of this kind, the Apostle says: "You
who would be justified in the Law . . . have fallen away from
grace."4

Chapter 18

25. Who could be so deaf to the words of the Apostle,
who so utterly foolish, and indeed, so insanely ignorant of
what he is saying, as to dare affirm that the Law is grace when
the Apostle, who did know what he was saying, declares
openly: “You who would be the justified in the Law . . . have
fallen away from grace"? But if the Law is not grace, seeing
that it is not the Law which helps us to observe the Law
itself, but grace, could it be that nature itself is grace? For
this is what the Pelagians have also dared to assert. They

3 Rom. 6.14.
4 Gal. 54.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 279

affirm that grace is the kind of nature wherein we have been
so created that we possess a rational mind, enabling us to
understand, and, being made after God’s image, to rule over
the fish and the birds of the air and over every animal that
creeps on land. But this is not the grace which the Apostle
commends to us through faith in Jesus Christ. For we cer-
tainly share this nature in common even with men who are
wicked and unbelievers, whereas grace through faith in Jesus
Christ is found only in those who have faith itself. “For not
all men have the faith.”! In short, just as the Apostle says in
all truth to those who have fallen from grace in their desire
to be justified by the Law: “For if justice is by the Law, then
Christ died in vain,"? so too it could be said in all truth to
those who think that the grace he commends and receives
through faith in Christ is nature, and if justice comes from
nature, then Christ died in vain. For the Law was then in
existence, and yet it did not justify; and nature was then
existing, and yet it did not justify. It was not in vain then
that Christ died in order that the Law might be fulfilled
through Him who declared: “I have not come to destroy the
Law but to fulfill it";? and that our nature, lost by Adam,
might be restored through Him who said He had come “to
seek and to save what was lost."* It was in His future coming
too, that the Fathers of old had put their faith.

26. The Pelagians likewise assert that God's grace, given
through faith in Christ, and which is neither the Law nor
nature, has power only to remit past sins and does not help us
avoid future sins or to overcome temptations. But if this were
true, then in our recitation of the Lord's prayer we would
not add the words, "and lead us not into temptation" right
after saying, "forgive us our debts as we also forgive our
debtors."5 We recite the former part of the prayer that our
1 2 Thess. 32.

2 Gal. 221.
3 Matt. 5.17.

4 Luke 19.10; Matt. 18.11.
5 Matt. 6.12-13.
280 SAINT AUGUSTINE

sins may be forgiven, and the latter, that we may avoid sin,
or overcome it. There would be no reason to make these peti-
tions to our Father in heaven if we were able to do these
things by human will-power. Now I would advise you and
strongly urge you to read attentively the work of Saint
Cyprian which he composed On the Lord’s Prayer and, so far
as God helps you, to understand and commit it to memory.
You will note in this book how he addresses himself to the
free will of those whom he is instructing in this treatise so
as to make it clear that they are to ask in prayer for help
to fulfill all that the Law commands. But this would certainly
be meaningless if man’s will were sufficient to do so without
the help of God.

Chapter 14

21. But we have shown these men to be no defenders of
free will, but rather its boastful destroyers. For the grace
bestowed upon us through Jesus our Lord is neither the
knowledge of God’s law nor nature nor the mere remission
of sin, but that grace which makes it possible to fulfill the
Law so that our nature is set free from the dominion of sin.
Since, as I say, the Pelagians have already been proven wrong
on these points, they now resort to this device in their
endeavor to show that God’s grace is given according to
our merits. They say this, for example: “Though grace is not
given in view of good works, inasmuch as it is by grace that
we do good, it is given nevertheless in view of the merits of a
good will,” since, as they maintain, “the good will of a man at
prayer precedes his prayer, this will is, in turn, preceded by
the will to believe, so that, consequent upon such merits,
there follows the bestowal of grace by God who hears our
prayers."

28. I have already discussed above the subject of faith,"

1 Cf. 7.16-17.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 281

namely, the will to believe, so as to show that faith pertains
to grace. The Apostle, for example, did not say, “I have ob-
tained mercy because I was faithful,” but rather, “I have
obtained mercy to be faithful.”? There are also other testi-
monies, including the passage: "Be wise unto sobriety, ac-
cording as God has divided to everyone the measure of
faith,” and the passage I already quoted: “By grace you have
been saved through faith; and that not from yourselves, but
it is the gift of God."* Besides, there are his words to the
Ephesians: “Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith,
from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.5 And
another passage where he says: “For you have been given the
favor on Christ's behalf—not only to believe in him but also
to suffer for him."9 Both of these, therefore, namely, the will
to believe and the patience to suffer, pertain to grace since, as
he stated, both have been given. And there is the very im-
portant passage where he says: "Since we have the same spirit
of faith . . ."" He does not say "knowledge of faith,” but
"spirit of faith." He put it this way that we might understand
how faith is given even without our asking for it, so that
other graces may be granted in answer to the prayer of faith.
"How," he asks, "are they to call upon him in whom they
have not believed?"* Accordingly, it is the spirit of grace that
enables us to have faith so that we may, through faith, ask in
prayer for the strength to do what is commanded of us. This
is why the Apostle constantly puts faith before the Law,
seeing that we are incapable of doing what the Law com-
mands unless, through faith, we ask in prayer for the strength
to do so.

29. For if faith pertains to the will alone and is not a gift

282 SAINT AUGUSTINE

of God, then why do we pray that those who refuse to believe
should come to believe? It would be absolutely useless for us
to do this unless we were entirely correct in our belief that
Almighty God can bring about a conversion of the will to
believe even in those whose wills are perverse and hostile to
the faith. The Psalmist does in fact put his finger on man’s
free will where he says: “Today if you shall hear His voice,
harden not your hearts.”® But if God were not able to take
away even that hardness of heart, He could not declare
through his Prophet: “I will take away the stony heart out of
their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh."!? The fact
that this prophecy was made with reference to the New Testa-
ment is clearly shown by the Apostle where he says: “You are
our letter . . . written not with ink but with the spirit of the
living God, not on tablets of stone but on fleshy tablets of the
heart."!! We are not to think that this was meant to imply
that those who should live spiritual lives might live according
to the flesh. What is meant is this: as a stone, with which a
hardened heart is compared, is without any feeling, what was
left for God but to compare a heart with understanding with
flesh and its capacity for feeling? The Prophet Ezechiel ex-
presses it this way: "I will give them another heart and give
them a new spirit; and I will take away the stony heart out
of their flesh, and I will give them a heart of flesh that they
may walk in my commandments and keep my judgments and
do them: and that they may be my people, and I may be their
God.":? Would it not be the height of absurdity for us to
maintain that there was some antecedent good merit in any
man's good will to bring about the removal of his stony
heart when, in fact, this stony heart simply signifies a will that
is obstinate and absolutely unbending in its opposition to
God? For where a good will precedes, there is, to be sure, no
longer a heart of stone.

9 Ps. 94.8.
10 Ezech. 11.19.
11 2 Cor. 3.2.3.
12 Ezech.

GRACE AND FREE WILL 288

30. In another passage, too, God makes it very plain
through the same Prophet that it is He who brings about such
changes, not by reason of any good merits found in men, but
for His own name's sake, where He says: "It is not for your
sake that I will do this, O house of Israel, but for my holy
name's sake, which you have profaned among the nations
whither you went. And I will sanctify my great name which
was profaned among the Gentiles, which you have profaned
in the midst of them: that the Gentiles may know that I am
the Lord, saith the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in
you before their eyes. For I will take you from among the
Gentiles and will gather you together out of all the countries
and will bring you into your own land. And I will pour upon
you clean water and you shall be cleansed from all your
filthiness and I will cleanse you from all your idols. And I
will give you a new heart and put a new spirit within you.
And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh and
I will give you a heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit in
the midst of you, and I will cause you to walk in my com-
mandments and to keep my judgments, and do them."1$

Who is so blind as not to see, who so stone-like as not to
perceive, that this grace is not given according to the merit
of a good will, when the Lord so testifies where He says: "I
will do this, O house of Israel, for my holy name's sake"?
Why, in fact, did He say, "I will do this, but for my holy
name's sake," if not to keep them from supposing that this
was done in view of their good merits, as the Pelagians are
not unashamed to maintain? The Lord makes it clear that
they not only had no previous good merits but even had evil
merits when He says: ". .. but for my holy name's sake which
you have profaned among the Gentiles." How can anyone fail
to see that the profanation of the Lord's name is a dreadful
evil? But yet "for my name's sake," He says, “which you have
profaned," I will make you good, but not for your own sake

18 Ezech. 36.22-27.
284 SAINT AUGUSTINE

“And I will sanctify my great name,” He says, “which was
profaned among the Gentiles, which you have profaned in
the midst of them.” He says He is going to sanctify His name
which He had said before was holy. Now this is the very thing
we pray for in the Lord's prayer when we say: “Hallowed be
thy name,” namely, that His name, which of itself is cer-
tainly ever holy, may be sanctified among men. There then
follow the words: “That the Gentiles may know that I am the
Lord, says the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in you
before their eyes.” Accordingly, though He is Himself forever
holy, yet is He sanctified among those on whom He bestows
His grace when He removes from them the stony heart with
which they had profaned the name of the Lord.

Chapter 15

31. But lest anyone should suppose that men do nothing
themselves in this matter by their free will, it is accordingly
said in the Psalm: “Harden not your hearts”; and in Ezechiel
himself: "Cast away from you all your transgressions which
you have wickedly committed against me and make to your-
selves a new heart and a new spirit, and keep all my com-
mandments. And why will you die, O house of Israel? For 1
desire not the death of him who dies, says the Lord God; be
converted and live."? We should keep in mind that the God
who tells us, “Be converted and live," is He to whom we pray,
“Convert us, O God.”3 We should keep in mind that He says:
"Cast away from you all your transgressions," even though it
is He Himself “who justifies the impious.”* We should keep
in mind that He who says, "Make to yourselves a new heart
and a new spirit," is the very one who declares: "I will give you

1 Ps. ᾿

2 Ezech. 18.31-32.
3 Ps. 79.4; 84.5-7.
4 Rom. 45.

GRACE AND FREE WILL 285

a new heart and put a new spirit within you.”> How then can
He say, “Make to yourselves,” when He says, “I will give you"?
Why does God command something of us if He is going to give
it Himself? Why does He give, if it is man who must act? Only
because He gives what He commands, whenever He helps man
to do what He commands. Free will is always present in us,
but it is not always good. For it is either free of justice, while
serving sin, and then it is evil; or it is free of sin, while serving
justice, and then it is good. But the grace of God is always good
and brings about a good will in a man who before was pos-
sessed of an evil will. It is by this grace, too, that this same good
will, once it begins to exist, is expanded and made so strong
that it is able to fulfill whatever of God’s commandments it
wishes, whenever it does so with a strong and perfect will.
This is the force of those words of the Scripture: “If thou
wilt keep my commandments . . . .”7 So let the man who has
the will, but not the power, realize that he does not yet have
a perfect will, and let him pray for a will strong enough to
fulfill the commandments. This is certainly the way a man re-
ceives help to do as he is commanded. The will is of use only
when we have the power, while the power is of use only
when we have the will. What good is it to us if we will what
we cannot do, or are unwilling to do what we are able to do?

Chapter 16

32. The Pelagians imagine they know something important
when they assert “God would not command something that
He knew man was unable to do.” How could anyone be

5 Ezech. 36.26.

6 The same thought is expressed in the famous formula of the Con-
fessions: Da quod iubes et iube quod vis (10.29.40; 10.37.60). In the
De dono perseverantiae (20.53), composed in 429, Augustine reports
how the Pelagian controversy was occasioned by Pelagius’ reading of
these passages.

7 Ecclus. [Sirach] 15.16.
286 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ignorant of that? But God does give commands beyond our
power precisely in order that we may know what it is we
ought to ask of Him. For it is faith itself which accomplishes
through prayer that which the Law commands. Now He who
said: “If thou wilt, thou shalt keep the commandments,” goes
on to say a little later in the same Book of Ecclesiasticus: “Who
shall set a guard before my mouth and a seal of wisdom
upon my lips, that I fall not by them and that my tongue
destroy me not?"! To be sure, he had already received these
commands: “Keep thy tongue from evil and thy lips from
speaking guile."? Inasmuch, then, as he spoke the truth in
saying: “If thou wilt, thou shalt keep the commandments,”
why does he ask that a guard be set before his mouth as the
Psalmist does where he asks: “Set a watch, O Lord, before my
mouth”? Why are God's commandments and his own free will
not enough for him when in fact he will keep the command-
ments if he so wills? How many are the commandments of
God directed against pride! He is familiar with them already,
and he will keep them if he will have the will to do so. Why,
then, does he say a little later: “O Lord, Father and God of
my life... give me not haughtiness of my eyes."* Already the
Law had commanded him: “Thow shalt not covet."5 Let him
therefore only do what is commanded since, if he so wills, he
will keep the commandments. Why then does he go on to
say: “Turn away from me all coveting"?* How many are the
commandments of God directed against impurity! Let him
only observe them because he will keep them if he so wills.
Why is it then that he crys out to God: “Let not the greedi-
ness of the belly and the lusts of the flesh take hold of me"??
Were we to address these questions to him in person, he

rom

E
3 Ps. 140.8.
4 Ecclus. [Sirach] 234-5.
5 Exod. 20.17.
6 Ecdus. [Sirach] 285.
7 Ecclus. [Sirach] 33.6.

GRACE AND FREE WILL 287

would reply altogether correctly and say: “From that prayer
of mine wherein I beg these favors of God, you may see what
was meant when I said, ‘If thou wilt, thou shalt keep the
commandments.’” Certainly, we do keep the commandments
if only we have the will to do so. But inasmuch as “the will
is prepared by the Lord,"5 we must ask of Him that strength
of will which is sufficient to bring our will to act. Certainly,
in willing anything, it is we who will, but it is He who enables
us to will what is good. And the words I quoted a short while
ago refer to Him, namely: “The will is prepared by the Lord.”
It is further said of Him: “The steps of a man are directed
by the Lord and He it is who wills his way";? and, "It is God
who works in you even to will.”1°

In doing anything, it is certainly we who act, but it is
God’s act that enables us to act by His bestowal of efficacious
power upon our will, as He says Himself: “And I will cause
you to walk in my commandments and to keep my judgments,
and to do them." In saying, "I will cause you . . . to do
them," what else is He saying but that, "I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh," which caused you not to do
them, and, "I will give you a heart of flesh, which will cause
you to do them"? And what else is meant here except that,
"I will take away the obstinate heart which caused you not
to do them and I will give you an obedient heart which will
cause you to do them"? He who causes us to act is He to
whom the Psalmist says: "Set a watch, O Lord, before my
mouth,”!2 which is the same as to say: “Cause me to set a
watch before my mouth." It was only after he had obtained
this favor from God that he declared: "I have set a guard
to my mouth."!3

8 Prov. 8.35. Cf. A. Sage, “ 'Preparatur voluntas a Domino," Revue des
études augustiniennes 10 (1 20.

9 Ps, 26.33.

10 Phil. 2.13.

11 Ezech. $6.27.

12 Ps. 140.3.

13 Ps. 38.2.
288 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 17

33. Whoever, therefore, has the will to keep God’s com-
mandment, but lacks the power, already possesses a good will,
but one that is still small and feeble. But once he comes to
have a great and robust will, he will have this power. When
the martyrs, for example, carried out those great command-
ments, they did so with a great will, namely, with that great
love whereof the Lord Himself says: “Greater love than this
no one has, that one lay down his life for his friends."! This
is also the reason why the Apostle says: "For he who loves
his neighbor has fulfilled the law. For "Thou shalt not com-
mit adultery; Thou shalt not kill; Thou shalt not steal; Thou
shalt not covet’; and if there is any other commandment, it is
summed up in the saying, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself.' Love does no evil to a neighbor. Love therefore is the
fulfillment of the Law."2

When the Apostle Peter thrice denied the Lord out of fear,
he did not yet have this love, for, as John the Evangelist says
in his Epistle: "There is no fear in love, but perfect love
casts out fear."3 Yet, though it was not great or perfect, love
was not wanting in Peter when he declared: "I will lay down
my life for thee,"4 inasmuch as he fancied he could do what
he had the will to do. And who was it that had begun to
impart to him this love, however small, but God who pre-
pares our will and brings to perfection through His coopera-
tion the work which His operation begins in us? For He who
first works in us the power to will is the same who cooperates
in bringing this work to perfection in those who will it. Ac-
cordingly, the Apostle says: "I am convinced of this, that he
who has begun a good work in you will bring it to perfection

1 John 18.18.
2 Rom. 13.8-10.
3 1 John 4.18.
4 John 14.37.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 289

until the day of Christ Jesus.”* God, then, works in us, with-
out our cooperation, the power to will, but once we begin
to will, and do so in a way that brings us to act, then it is
that He cooperates with us. But if He does not work in us
the power to will or does not cooperate in our act of willing,
we are powerless to perform good works of a salutary nature.
With reference to His working in us the power to will, it is
said: “For it is God who works also in you to will,"? whereas,
concerning His cooperation in us, once we begin to will so
that our volition brings us to act, the Apostle says: “Now we
know that for those who love God all things work together
unto good."* What does he mean by “all things,” if not the
terrible and cruel sufferings we now endure? To be sure, this
yoke of Christ, so burdensome for our infirmity, is made light
where there is love. For the Lord has said that His burden
is light® for men such as Peter was at the time he suffered for

Christ, not as he was when he denied Christ.

84. It is such a charity as this, namely, a will on fire with
God's love, which is commended to us by the Apostle where
he says: "Who shall separate us from the love of God? Shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or hunger, or naked-
ness, or danger, or the sword? Even as it is written: ‘For thy
sake we are put to death all the day long. We are regarded as
sheep for the slaughter.’ But in all things we overcome be-
6 Phil. 2.13.

7 Rom. 8.28. Here, as well as in the subsequent companion treatise De
correplione et gratia (7.14), Augustine adopts the reading cooperatur
instead of the Vulgate reading cooperantur, employed in his previous
works. Taken in conjunction with the previous text from the Phil-
ippians, "For it is God who works (operatur) in you also to will,” the
reading cooperatur enables Augustine to draw the distinction between
gratia operans and gratia cooperans, which corresponds with the dis-
tinction made above between "imperfect" and “perfect” love, as
exemplified in the conduct of the apostle Peter. Theologians of the
later Augustinian school will base their distinction of gratia versatilis
(inefficacious grace) and gratia efficax (efficacious grace) on this passage
of Grace and Free Will. The former, they contend, was sufficient for
man in the state of innocence, whereas the latter is necessary for man

after the Fall.
8 Ct. Matt. 11.30.

290 SAINT AUGUSTINE

cause of him who has loved us. For I am sure that neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature will be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”® And in another
passage: “And I point out to you a yet more excellent way.
If I should speak with the tongues of men and angels, but do
not have charity, I have become as sounding brass and a
tinkling cymbal. And if I have prophecy and know all mys-
teries and all knowledge, and if I have all faith so as to remove
mountains, yet do not have charity, I am nothing. And if I
distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and if I deliver my
body to be burned, yet do not have charity, it profits me
nothing. Charity is patient, is kind; charity does not envy, is
not pretentious, is not puffed up, is not ambitious, is not
self-seeking, is not provoked; thinks no evil, does not rejoice
over wickedness, but rejoices with truth; bears with all things,
believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. Charity
never fails."!? And a little later in the same passage: “There
abide faith, hope, and charity, these three: but the greatest of
these is charity. Aim at charity."!! Likewise, writing to the
Galatians, he says: "For you have been called to liberty,
brethren; only do not use liberty as an occasion for sensuality,
but by charity serve one another. For the whole Law is ful-
filled in one word: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy-
self.’ "12 This is the very thing he says to the Romans: “For
he who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the Law."1? And in a
similar vein to the Colossians: “But about all these things
have charity, which is the bond of perfection."!* Writing to
Timothy, he says: "Now the end of the commandment is
charity," a kind of charity, as he goes on to add, which is

9 Rom. -89.

10 1 Co: 31; 18.1-
11 1 Cor. 13.13-14.1.
12 5.18-14.

13 18.8.

14 3.14.

8.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 291

“from a pure heart, and a good conscience, and an unfeigned
faith."!5 Moreover, when he tells the Corinthians: "Let all
that you do be done in charity,"9 he makes it clear enough
that even corrections are to be administered with charity,
though they are felt to be sharp and bitter by those who are
undergoing correction. Accordingly, once he had given this
direction in another passage: "Reprove the irregular, comfort
the fainthearted, support the weak, be patient towards all
men," he at once added: "See that no one renders evil for
evil to any man.”!7 Even in correcting the irregular, there-
fore, we are not rendering evil for evil, but rather good for
evil. And what else but love can do all this?

35. And there is the Apostle Peter who says: "But above
all things have a constant mutual charity among yourselves;
for charity covers a multitude of sins.”18 And the Apostle
James likewise says: “If, however, you fulfill the royal law,
according to the Scriptures, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself,’ you do well"? Similarly, the Apostle John declares:
“He who loves his brother abides in the light";?? and in
another place: “Whoever is not just is not of God, nor is He
just who does not love his brother. For this is the message that
you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one
another.”2! And again: "And this is his commandment, that
we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and
love one another";?? also: “And this commandment we have
from him, that he who loves God should love his brother
also.”28 And then a little later: “In this we know that we love
the children of God, when we love God and do his com-
mandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep his com-

15 1Tim. L5.

16 1 Cor. 16.14.

17 1 Thess. 5.14-15.
18 1 Peter 48.

19 James 2.8.

20 1 John 2.10.

21 1 John 3.10.

22 1 John $25.

23 1 John 421.
292 SAINT AUGUSTINE

mandments, and his commandments are not burdensome.’?+
And in his Second Epistle we find it written: “. . . not as
writing to thee a new commandment, but that which we
have had from the beginning, that we love one another.”25

36. The Lord Jesus Himself also declares that the whole
Law and the Prophets depend upon the two precepts to love
God and our neighbor.?* In the Gospel of Mark we find this
written concerning these two precepts. "And one of the
Scribes came forward who had heard them disputing together;
and seeing that He had answered them well, he asked him
which was the first commandment of all. But Jesus answered
him, ‘The first commandment of all is: “Hear O Israel! The
Lord our God is one God; and thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and
with thy whole mind [and with all thy strength].” This is the
first commandment. And the second is like to it: “Thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself.”2? There is no other command-
ment greater than these.’ "28 He likewise declares in the Gospel
of John: “A new commandment I give you, that you love
one another: that as I have loved you, you also love one
another. By this will all men know that you are my disciples,
if you have love for one another."??

Chapter 18

87, All these precepts concerning love, or charity, would
have been given men to no purpose if they did not have
free choice of the will; for such is their nature and importance
that whatever a man supposes he is doing well is not done
well at all if it is done without charity. Now these precepts

25 2 John 5.

26 Cf. Matt. 22.40.

27 Deut. 64-5; Lev. 19.18.
28 Mark 12.28-81.

29 13.34-35.

24 :jom 52-8.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 293

are given in both the Old and New Law, though the grace
promised in the Old Law comes only with the New Law.
Without grace, the Law is the letter that killeth, whereas,
with grace, it is the life-giving spirit. Whence comes this love
of God and neighbor in man, if not from God Himself? For
if it does not come from God, but from man, then it is the
Pelagians who have prevailed; but if it comes from God,
then we have prevailed over the Pelagians. Let the Apostle
John, therefore, sit in judgment between us and issue the
command: “Dearly beloved, love one another"! When the
Pelagians begin to feel elated at these words of the Apostle
and to ask why this command is given us at all unless we are
able of ourselves to love one another, the same John proceeds
to confound them by saying: “For love is from God."? Charity,
therefore, is not of ourselves, but of God.

Why then has the command been given, "Let us love one
another, for love is of God," except that this precept should
prompt our free will to ask for God's gift? And this would
certainly be of no avail at all unless the will at first received
some measure of love enabling it to ask for more, so as to
fulfill what was commanded. When it says, "Love one another"
—that is the Law; when it says, "love is of God"—that is
grace. Certainly, God's “Wisdom carries law and mercy upon
her tongue."5 Whence it is written in the Psalm: “For the
lawgiver shall give a blessing."*

38. Let no one then deceive you, my brethren, for we
could not love God unless He first loved us. The same John
makes this very clear when he says: "Let us therefore love,
because God first loved us."5 Grace makes us lovers of the
Law, whereas the same Law, without grace, makes of us only
prevaricators, And the Lord teaches us the same thing where
He says to His Apostles: “You have not chosen me but I have

I 1 John 47.
2 1 John 47.
294 SAINT AUGUSTINE

chosen you.”6 For if we first loved Him so as to merit His
love in return, then we first chose Him so as to merit our
being chosen by Him. But He who is Truth Itself says other-
wise and openly contradicts such human vanity by declaring:
“You have not chosen me.” Consequently, if it is not you
who have chosen, then it is certainly not you who have loved;
for how could they choose Him whom they did not love?
“But it is I,” He says, “who have chosen you.” And how could
they possibly fail to choose Him afterwards, or fail to prefer
Him to all the goods of this world? It was because they were
chosen that they chose Him; they were not chosen because
they had chosen Him. There would be no merit in men's
choosing Him unless the action of God's grace in choosing
them had gone before. This is why in imparting his blessing
to the Thessalonians the Apostle Paul declares: “And may
the Lord make you to increase and abound in charity towards
one another, and towards all men.”? He who gave this blessing
to love one another is the same who gave us the love to love
one another. Again, because some of them were sure to possess
already the good dispositions he wished to be theirs, he went
on to say in another passage, directed to the same Thessalon-
ians: “We are bound to give thanks to God always for you,
brethren, as is fitting, because your faith grows exceedingly
and your charity each for the other increases."9 This he said
so that they might not be elated over this great blessing which
they enjoyed from God, as if it were something they possessed
of themselves. Seeing, therefore, that your faith grows ex-
ceedingly and your charity for each other increases, as the
Apostle says, we ought to thank God in your regard, and
not praise you as if you possessed all this of yourselves.

39, And writing to Timothy, he says: “For God has not
given us the spirit of fear, but of power and of love and of

GRACE AND FREE WILL 295

prudence.”® We are certainly not to understand from these
words of the Apostle that the spirit of the fear of God is
something that we have not received. It is unquestionably a
great gift of God and one concerning which the Prophet
Isaia says: “And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him:
the spirit of wisdom and of understanding, the spirit of coun-
sel and of fortitude, the spirit of knowledge and godliness,
the spirit of the fear of the Lord."!9 The spirit of fear which
we have received is not that which led Peter to deny Christ,
but that fear whereof Christ Himself says: “Be afraid of him
who has power to destroy both body and soul in hell. Yes, I
say to you, be afraid of him."!! Now He said this so that we
might not deny Him by the kind of fear that had shaken
Peter. It was because he wished to remove such fear from
us that He had said earlier: “Do not be afraid of those who
kill the body, and after that have nothing more that they
can do.”!2 It is not the spirit of such fear as this that we
have received, but the spirit of power and of love and of
prudence. Referring to this kind of fear, the same Apostle
declares to the Romans: “We exult in tribulations, knowing
that tribulation works out endurance, and endurance tried
virtue, and tried virtue hope. And hope does not disappoint,
because the charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by
the Holy Spirit who is given to us."!? It is not by ourselves,
therefore, but ‘by the Holy Spirit who is given to us, that
this charity shown by the Apostle to be God’s gift, is the
reason why tribulation does not destroy patience but rather
gives rise to it. Again, writing to the Ephesians, he says: “Peace
to the brethren, and love with faith.” Great blessings, indeed,
but now let him tell us whence they come. “From God the

9 2 Tim. 1.7.
10 Isa. 11.28,

1 Luke 12.5.
12 Luke 12.4,
13 Rom. 5.3-5.
296 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Father" he replies, “and the Lord Jesus Christ.” These
great blessings then are none other than C:«'s gifts to us.

Chapter 19

40. But it is not surprising that "the light shines in the
darkness and the darkness grasps it not." It is this Light
that says to us in John's Epistle: “Behold what manner of
love the Father has bestowed upon us that we should be
called and should be the sons of God,"? while the Darkness
tells us in the Pelagian writings: "Love comes to us of our-
selves." If these men had true love, that is, Christian love,
they would also know whence they come to have it, as the
Apostle knew when he said: "Now we have received not the
spirit of the world, but the spirit that is from God, that we
may know the things that have been given us by God."* And
John says: "God is love."* The Pelagians further maintain
that they possess God and that this does not come from God
but from themselves. And while they acknowledge that the
knowledge of the Law comes to us from God, they would
have it that charity comes from ourselves, being deaf to the
words of the Apostle that "knowledge puffs up, but charity
edifies."5 What could be more inept, what could really be
more absurd or more alien to the essential holiness of charity
than to maintain that knowledge, which puffs up without
charity, comes from God, while that which makes it impos-
sible for knowledge to puff up, namely, charity, comes from
ourselves? Again, when the Apostle speaks of "Christ's love
which surpasses knowledge," what greater absurdity than to

14 Eph. 6.28.

1 John 15.
2 1 John 3.1.
3 1 Cor. 2.12.
4 1 John 4.16.
5 1 Cor. 8.1.
6 Eph. 3.19.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 297

suppose that knowledge, which ought to be subject to charity,
comes to us fro*- God, while charity which surpasses knowl-
edge, comes fron. ourselves? But true faith and sound teaching
tell us that knc edge and love are both from God, since, as
the Scripture says: “From his face came knowledge and under-
standing";* and, "love is of God."* We likewise read of the
"spirit of knowledge and piety,"? and of the "spirit of power
and of love and of prudence."!? But charity is a greater gift
than knowledge; for whenever knowledge is present in man,
charity is necessary to keep him from being puffed up, whereas
charity “does not envy, is not pretentious, is not puffed up."!1

Chapter 20

41. I think I have argued at sufficient length against those
who inveigh so violently against the grace of God. The will is
not destroyed by grace, but is changed from a bad to a good
will, and is aided by grace once it becomes good. I also believe
that I have done so in such a way that it has been the
Sacred Scriptures, rather than I, that have spoken to you by
their very clear testimonies of the truth. If the Scripture is
examined carefully, it will not merely show that God has
power over the good wills of men which He has changed
Írom being evil and which He directs toward the performance
of good acts and life eternal once He has made them good.
It will also reveal that those wills of men which remain
creatures of this world are so subject to God's power that He
can bend them wherever and whenever He pleases, whether
by bestowing benefits upon some or by inflicting punishment
upon others, according as He Himself ordains by His decrees,
hidden of course from us, but perfectly just beyond all doubt.
7 Prov. 2.6.

8 1 John 47.
9 Isa. 11.2.

10 2 Tim. 1.7.
11 1 Cor. 134.
298 SAINT AUGUSTINE

For we find that some sins are also a punishment for other
sins, as instanced in those “vessels of wrath” which the Apostle
speaks of as “ready for destruction”;+ or as in the hardening of
Pharao’s heart in order, as it is said, to manifest God's
power in him;? and as in the flight of the Israelites from the
face of the enemy out of the city of Hai because fear was
instilled into their hearts so that they fled. And this was done
to punish their sin, and to punish it as it deserved to be
punished, which is why the Lord said to Josue, the son of
Nun: “The children of Israel shall not be able to stand before
his enemies.” What is the meaning of "shall not be able to
stand"? Why did they not use their free will to stand rather
than take flight because their wills were thrown into con-
fusion by fear? Was it not for the simple reason that God, as
Master of men's wills, can in His anger instill fear into the
hearts of whomsoever He pleases? Was it not of their own
free choice that the enemies of the Israelites fought against
God's own people when they had Josue, son of Nun, as their
leader? And yet the Scripture tells us that "it was by the will
of the Lord that their hearts should be strengthened that
they should fight against Israel . . . and should be destroyed."*
Was it not of his own free will that the wicked man Semei,
son of Gera, cursed King David? And yet what does David
say, filled as he was with a true and deep and heavenly wis-
dom? What, I ask, does he say to the man who wanted to
strike down his reviler? "What have I to do with you," he
says, “ye sons of Sarvia? Let him alone and let him curse: for
the Lord hath bid him curse David. And who is he that shall
dare say, "Why hath he done this?' "5 Then, as if to give full

1 Rom. 922. The Vulgate reads “ready for destruction.” In the examples
which follow Augustine illustrates his point that "some sins are even
a punishment for other sins.” In a letter to Sixtus, which occasioned
the present treatise, he states that the heart is hardened, not by
God’s imparting malice to it, but by not imparting His mercy to it
(Ep. 1943.14) .

2 C£ Exod. 9.16.

3 Jos. 7.12.

4 Jos. 11.20.

5 2 Kings 16.10.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 299

approval to King David's judgment, the Sacred Scripture re-
peats the episode from a different starting point, saying:
"And King David said to Abisai and to all his servants: Be-
hold my son who came forth from my bowels seeketh my
life: how much more now a son of Jemini? Let him alone that
he may curse as the Lord hath bidden him. Perhaps the Lord
may look upon my affliction, and the Lord may render me
good for the cursing of this day."* How is it possible even
for a wise man to understand how God could tell this man
to curse David? Actually, He did not tell him this by way of
a command, for then the man would have been praised for
his obedience. Rather, God inclined his will, which was al-
ready perverted by its own wickedness, to a sin of this
kind, in accordance with His own just and hidden judgment.
It was in this sense that the Lord spoke to him. For if he had
obeyed God's order, he would have deserved praise rather
than blame, as we know he was punished afterwards because
of this sin. Nor does the Scripture conceal the reason why
God told him in this way to curse David, namely, why He
caused his heart to fall into this sin or allowed it to do so.
"Perhaps the Lord will look upon my affliction,” he says,
"and the Lord will render me good for the cursing of this
day." Here you have a proof of how God uses even the
hearts of wicked men to commend and help those who are
good. It was thus that He made use of Judas in his betrayal
of Christ and of the Jews who crucified Him. And, as a
result of this, how great have been the blessings which He
has bestowed upon the people who were to believe in Him?
He even makes use of the devil himself, the worst of all, but
does so in the best way possible to exercise and put to the
test the faith and piety of good men; not for His own sake,
since He knows everything before it happens, but for our
benefit, since it was necessary that He should deal with us
in this fashion.

6 2 Kings 16.11-12.
300 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Was it not by Absalom’s own will that he chose to follow
advice that proved detrimental to him, though he only did so
because the Lord had heard his father's prayer to this effect?”
Accordingly, as the Scripture says: “And by the command of
the Lord the good counsel of Achitophel was defeated, that
the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom."5 The counsel of
Achitophel was called “good” because it served his purpose
for the time, since it favored Absalom over his father whom
he had risen up against in rebellion. And it might well have
destroyed him if the Lord had not frustrated Achitophel’s
counsel by influencing the heart of Absalom to reject this
counsel and to choose another which was not to his advantage.

Chapter 21

42. Who can help but tremble at the thought of these
judgments of God whereby He accomplishes whatever He
pleases even in the hearts of wicked men, while yet rendering
to each according to his merits? Solomon’s son, Roboam, re-
jected the salutary counsel of the elders, not to deal harshly
with the people, and yielded to the words of men of his own
age by replying with threats to those who should have been
given a gentle reply. And how did this come about, except by
his own will? But as a result of it, the ten tribes of Israel
withdrew from him and set up for themselves another king,
Jeroboam, that the will of God, who had been angered, might
be accomplished, as He had also foretold that it would come
to pass. For what does the Scripture say? “And the king
condescended not to the people: for the Lord was turned
away from him to make good his word, which he had spoken
through Ahias, the Silonite, to Jeroboam the son of Nabat.”!
"7 Gf. 2 Kings 15.81.

8 2 Kings 17.14.

1 8 Kings 12.15.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 301

All this was certainly done by man’s will, but in such a way
that the “turning way” came from the Lord.

Just read the Books of Paralipomenon and this is what you
will find written in the Second Book: “And the Lord stirred
up against Jarom the spirit of the Philistines and of the
Arabians who border on the Ethiopians. And they came up
to the land of Juda and wasted it, and they carried away all
substance that was found in the king’s house.” Here we have
a clear indication of how God stirs up enemies to lay waste
those countries which He judges to be deserving of such
punishment. And yet, was it not of their own will that the
Philistines and Arabs came to lay waste the country of Juda?
Or did they so come of their own will that the Scripture lies
where it tells us that the Lord stirred up their spirit to do so?
On the contrary. Both statements are true because they did
come of their own will and God did stir up their spirit. The
same thing could also be expressed by saying that God both
stirred up their spirit and that they came nevertheless of their
own will. For the Almighty, who cannot possibly will any-
thing unjust, is able to set in motion even the inclinations of
their will in men’s hearts in order to accomplish through
these men whatever He wishes to achieve through their
agency. What meaning can these words have which the man
of God addressed to King Amasias: "Let not the army of
Israel go out with thee, for the Lord is not with Israel and
all the children of Ephraim. And if thou think to prevail over
them, God will put thee to flight before thy enemies; for it
belongeth to God both to help and to put to flight"?*
How does the power of God help some in war by giving them
confidence, and turn others to flight by instilling them with
fear, except for this reason, that He who has made all things
as He willed in heaven and on earth, also works in the hearts
of men? We also read of what Joas, King of Israel, said when
he dispatched a messenger to King Amasias, who had a mind

2 2 Par. 21.16-17.
3 2 Par. 25.7-8.
302 SAINT AUGUSTINE

to go to war with him. Having mentioned certain things, he
went on to say: “Sit at home. Why provokest thou evil that
thou shouldst fall and Juda with thee?"* The Scripture then
went on to add: “And Amasias would not hearken to him be-
cause it was the Lord’s will that he should be delivered into
the hands of enemies because they sought after the gods of
Edom."5 There you see how God, wishing to punish the sin of
idolatry, influenced the heart of this man with whom he
was indeed justly angry, that he would not heed salutary
advice but, in his contempt for it, would engage in battle,
there to perish together with his army. Speaking through
His prophet Ezechiel, God said: “And when the prophet
shall err and speak, I the Lord have deceived that prophet:
and I will stretch forth my hand upon him and I will cut him
off from the midst of my people Israel.”¢ We read in the Book
of Esther how this woman from the people of Israel became
the wife of a foreign king, Assuerus, in the land of captivity.
It is recorded in this Book that when Esther was faced with
the necessity of intervening for her people, whom the king
had ordered to be slain wherever they might be found in his
kingdom, she prayed to the Lord. The urgency of the situa-
tion made her venture into the king’s presence contrary to
the king’s orders and to her own accustomed way of acting.
Observe now what the Scripture says: “He looked upon her
with the violent indignation of a bull; the queen was fright-
ened and her color changed through faintness; she leaned
upon the head of her maid-companion who went before her.
And God changed the King and turned his indignation into
gentleness.”? It is also written in the Proverbs of Solomon:
“Even as the rush of water, so the heart of the king is in the
hands of the Lord; whithersoever he will he shall turn it."*
And in Psalm 104, concerning the Egyptians, we read what
4 4 Kings 14.10.

5 2 Par. 25.20.

6 Ezech. 14.9.

7 Esth. 15.10-11 [LXX].
8 Prov. 21.1.
GRACE AND FREE WILL 303

God did to them: “He turned their hearts to hurt his people
and to deal deceitfully with his servants.”® Observe also what
is written in the Epistles of the Apostles. We read in the
Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Romans: “Therefore God
gave them up in the lustful desires of their hearts to un-
cleanness”; and a little later: “For this cause God has given
them up to shameful lusts”; and a few verses later: “And as
they have resolved against possessing the knowledge of God,
God has given them up to a reprobate sense, so that they
do what is not fitting.”1° And in the Second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, he has this to say of certain men: “For they
have not received the love of truth that they might be saved.
Therefore God sends them a misleading influence that they
may believe falsehood, that all may be judged who have not
believed the truth, but have preferred wickedness.”

43. From these and other similar testimonies of the in-
spired Books, which cannot all be mentioned for want of
time, I think it is quite clear that God works in men's hearts
to incline their wills to whatsoever way He wills: either to
good in accordance with His mercy, or to evil in accordance
with their evil merits, and this, indeed, by His own judgments,
sometimes manifest, sometimes hidden, but always just.!?
You must keep this conviction firm and unshaken in your
heart that in God there is no injustice. Accordingly, when you
read the truth of the Scriptures and find that men are led
astray by God, or that their hearts are dulled and hardened
by Him, have no doubt that it was their previous evil merits
that made them suffer their just penalties. You will thus not
clash with that proverb of Solomon: “The folly of man per-
verts his ways, while he blames God in his heart.”18

But grace is not given according to men's merits; otherwise
grace is no longer grace, seeing that it is called grace precisely
9 Ps. 104.25.

10 Rom. 1.24, 26, 28.
11 2 Thess. 210-11.

12 Cf. Rom. 9.14.
13 Prov. 19.8.
304 SAINT AUGUSTINE

because it is freely given. Now if God is able, either through
good or bad angels, or in some other way, to work in the
hearts of even wicked men according to their merits—though
He is not the cause of their wickedness, which they have
either contracted through original sin or have increased
through their own will—what wonder is it that He should
work good in the hearts of His elect through the Holy Spirit,
when He has already brought about a change in these same
hearts from evil to good?

Chapter 22

44. But suppose men do imagine that there are merits of
some kind which they think come first in order that they may
be justified by God's grace, though they fail to see that by
making such an assertion they are simply denying grace. But,
as I said, let them imagine anything they want to with regard
to adults. In the case of infants, at least, the Pelagians do not
know what to answer, since there is nothing voluntary in
their receiving grace which they can allege as a cause of any
previous merit. Moreover, while they are being baptized and
made recipients of God's sacraments, we see how they even
cry and put up a struggle, which should be imputed to them
as a grave sin of irreverence if they already enjoyed the use
of free will. And though they put up a struggle, grace never-
theless remains in them, obviously without any previous
good merits; otherwise grace would no longer be grace. There
are times too when this grace is conferred upon the children
of unbelievers as when, in God's hidden Providence, they fall
somehow or other into the hands of devout persons. But
there are other times when the children of believers fail to
obtain such grace because there is some obstacle present
which makes it impossible to come to their aid when they are
in danger of death. Certainly, these things take place by the
GRACE AND FREE WILL 305

hidden Providence of God “whose judgments are incompre-
hensible and whose ways are unsearchable.”! Take a careful
look at what the Apostle had said before which led him to
say what he did. He was discussing the Jews and Gentiles
when, writing to the Romans, to Gentiles, that is, he had
said: “For as you at one time did not believe God, but now
have obtained mercy by reason of their unbelief, so they too
have not now believed by reason of the mercy shown you,
that they too may obtain mercy. For God has shut up all in
unbelief, that he may have mercy upon all"? And after he
had reflected upon what he had said, filled, indeed, with
wonderment over the real truth of his words, but astounded
by their great depth, of how God had shut up all in unbelief
to show them all mercy—as if doing evil that good might
result—he exclaimed at once, saying: “O the depth of the
riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge of God. How in-
comprehensible are his judgments and how unsearchable his
ways.” But there are certain perverse men, thoughtless and
censorious, who through their inability to understand what
is meant by the incomprehensible judgments and unsearch-
able ways, have boastfully supposed that the Apostle was say-
ing: "Let us do evil that good may come."* God forbid that
the Apostle should ever say this! But this is what those who
fail to understand the Apostle thought he meant when he
said: “Now the Law intervened that the offense might
abound. But where the offense has abounded, grace has
abounded yet more."5 Grace does of course result in this,
that good works are now performed by those who before had
done evil; it does not make them continue in doing evil in
the belief that good will be given them in return. So they
should not say: “Let us do evil that good may come,” but
rather: "We have done evil and good has come; let us now
1 Cf. Rom. 11. 38.
2 Rom. 11.30.85.
3 Rom. 11.33.

4 Rom. 3.8.
5 Rom. 5.20.

306 SAINT AUGUSTINE

do good so that we who have received good for evil in this
world may receive good for good in the world to come.” Thus
is it written in the Psalm: “Mercy and judgment I will sing
to thee.”@ Accordingly, the Son of Man did not first come
into the world to judge the world, but came in order that
the world might be saved through Him.’ He first came out of
mercy; He will come hereafter for judgment, to judge the
living and the dead, though, even at the present time, there
is no salvation without judgment, but it is a hidden judgment.
This is why He says: “For judgment have I come into this
world, that they who do not see may see, and they who see
may become blind."$

Chapter 23

45. Accordingly when you observe the case of infants
who undoubtedly are all subject to the same condition of
having contracted the hereditary sin from Adam, and you
see that one is helped to receive baptism, but not another,
so that he dies shackled in the very chains of this sin; or that
one who was baptized and whose future wickedness was for-
seen by God, is abandoned in this life, while another is
snatched from this life after baptism "lest wickedness should
alter his understanding"'—you must refer these things to
God's hidden judgments. You must not ascribe them to in-
justice or to a want of wisdom on the part of God in whom
there is found the very source of justice and wisdom. Rather,
as I exhorted you from the beginning of this treatise? you
are to walk according to the light already received. And God
will disclose to you this mystery also, if not in this life, at
least in the next, for “there is nothing concealed that will not
6 1001.

7 Cf. John 3.17.
8 John 9.89.

1 Wisd. 4.11.
2 Ct. L1.

GRACE AND FREE WILL 307

be disclosed.” Consequently, when you hear the Lord say:
"I the Lord have deceived that prophet,"* or the words of the
Apostle: "He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he wills
he hardens,"5 you must believe that there were evil merits in
that man whom God permits to go astray and to become
hardened, while, for the man upon whom He has mercy, you
must acknowledge with an unswerving faith that this is a
case of the grace of God who is not rendering evil for evil,
but good for evil? And you must not deny free will to Pharao
just because God says in a number of places: "I have hardened
Pharao," or, "I will harden the heart of Pharao," for it does
not thereby follow that it was not Pharao himself who hard-
ened his own heart. Furthermore, we read that this happened
to Pharao after the plague of flies had been removed from the
Egyptians, as the Scripture testifies: “And Pharao's heart was
hardened so that neither this time would he let the people
go.”8 Thus it was that both God and Pharao caused this
hardening of the heart: God, by His just judgments, Pharao,
by his free will.

You may be sure then that your efforts will not be in vain
if only you persevere unto the end by going ahead with your
good resolve. But God, who does not presently deal with
those whom He sets free according to their works, will then
render to each one according to his works. Being just, He
will indeed render evil for evil; being good, He will render
good for evil; being both good and just, He will render good
for good. This only He will not do, namely, render evil for
good, seeing that He is not unjust. He will, therefore, render
evil for evil, and punishment for unrighteousness. He will
also render good for evil, grace for unrighteousness, good for
good, and grace for grace.

; 9.12; 10.20, 27; 144.

808 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 24

46. Go over this treatise carefully in your mind. If you
understand it, give thanks to God; where you fail to under-
stand it, pray for understanding which God will give you.
Recall the words of Scripture: “If anyone of us is wanting in
wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives abundantly to all
men, and does not reproach; and it will be given to him.”!
As the Apostle himself expresses it, this is the wisdom "that
descends from above."? But you must ward off from you, and
pray that that kind of wisdom be not found in you which
the Apostle abominated where he said: "But if you have
bitter jealousy and contention in your hearts . . . this is not
the wisdom that descends from above. It is earthly, sensuous,
devilish. For where there is envy and contentiousness, there is
instability and every wicked deed. But the wisdom that is
from above is first of all chaste, then peaceable, moderate,
docile . . . full of mercy and good fruits, without judging,
without dissimulation.”* What blessing, then, will that man
not possess who has asked for and received this wisdom from
the Lord? And this will give you an understanding of what
grace is; for if this wisdom were from ourselves, it would not
be from above and we would not have to ask for it from the
same God who created us.

Pray for us also, brethren, that "we may live temperately
and justly and piously in this world, looking for the blessed
hope and manifestation of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ," to whom belong honor and glory and kingdom, with
the Father and the Holy Spirit, forever and ever. Amen.

1 James 1.5.
2 James 3.17.
3 James 3.14-17.
4 Titus 212-18.
INDICES
GENERAL INDEX

Abisai, 298.

Absalom, 300.

Achitophel, 300.

Adeodatus, 3, 65.

adultery, why evil, 76-78.

Aeneid 2.659, 10.

Ahias, 300.

Amasias, King, 301 f.

Ananias, 50.

Andria, of Terence, 18 n.

anima, animus, 88 n.

Assuerus, King, 302.

Augustine, St.:
at Cassiciacum, 3; apprecia-
tion of son Adeodatus, 3 n.;
Platonic reminiscence, 4 n.,
5 n.; doctrine of “illumina-
tion," 5 n., 54 n., 73 n., 85,
110 n.; adherence to Ac-
ademic doubt, 45 n.; on be-
lief and understanding, 2,
50 £., 69; Platonic influence
on, 51 n.; on sensation, 52
n; on memory, 53 n;
knowledge of Punic lan-

311

guage, 58 n.; program of
liberal arts, 60 n.; coined
term soliloquia, 65 n.; com-
position and scope of The
Free Choice of the Will, 66,
70; on origin of Pelagian-
ism, 67, 285 n.; ordained
priest, 70; correspondence
with Evodius, 70 n. at-
tracted by Manichaean
dualism, 75 n.; on origin
of the soul, 215-222; on
existence of God, 113 ff;
refutation of skepticism,
114 n. Pythagorean influ-
ence on, 140 n.; Christian
humanism of, 147 n; De
pulchro et apto, lost work
of, 151 n; on God's fore-
knowledge and human free-
dom, 168 ff.; on the Divine
Ideas, 177 n.; works on
grace enumerated, 245 n.;
and monks of Hadrume-
tum, 246 £.; correspondence
312

with Valentine of Hadru-
metum, 246 n.; Grace and
Free Will, purpose of, 247
L; references to works not
contained in this volume:
De beata vita, 3 n., 33, 65,
114 n.; De ordine, 52 n.
65, 67, 140 n.; Soliloquia,
4, 51 n., 65, 73 n., 114 n;
De quantitate animae, 4,
65, 70; De immortalitate
animae, 65; De vera re-
ligione, 52 n., 114 n; De
utilitate credendi, 51 n., 75
n.; C. Secundinum, 69, 147
n.; De diversis quaestioni-
bus 83, 177 n.; Confessiones,
3, 53, 151 n. 285 n.; De
Trinitate, 5, 50 n., 114 n.,
146 n. Tractatus in evan-
gelium Ioannis, 51 n., 69
n.; De Genesi ad litteram,
146 n., 154 n.; De sermone
Domini in monte, 9 n.; De
fide et operibus, 269 n.; De
dono perseverantiae, 67; De
correptione et gratia, 289
n; De gestis Pelagii, 266
n.; Opus imperfectum con-
tra Iulianum, 218 n.; Ep.
120, 50 n.; Ep. 166, 69 n.,
218 n.; Ep. 190, 245 n.; Ep.
194, 24 n.; Ep. 214, 246 n.;
Ep. 215, 246, n.; Sermo 56,
9

Augustinian School, on effi-
cacious and ineffacacious
grace, 289 n.

Azarias, 50.

INDEX

Bafiez, 173 n.

baptism, of children, 255 ff.

believing, and knowing, 50 f.;
and understanding, 50 f,
112 f.

Bonner, G., 66 n., 78 n.

Boyer, C., 33 n., 69 n.

cardinal virtues, 97 f.

Cassiciacum, 3, 65.

Cassian, John, 248 n.

Celestius, Pelagian, 266 n.

certitude, implied in personal
existence, 114.

Christ, the inner Teacher, 51;
dwells in the inner man, 51;
inner Oracle, 61.

Christian humanism, 147 n.
Cicero, In Verrem, 26; Tuscu-
lanae disputationes, 26 n.

Cilleruelo, L., 54 n.

cogito, Augustinian and Car-
tesian, 114 n.

concupiscentia and libido, 78

n.

Council of Carthage, 245.

Courcelle, P., 5 n.

creation, order in, 187 ff;
perfected by rational crea-
tures, 205.

creationism, 218 n.

credere and scire, 50 n.

Cresconius, monk of Hadru-
metum, 246.

Da quod jubes et jube quod
vis, reaction of Pelagius to,
285 n.
INDEX

David, King, 298 ff.

De auxiliis, 248 n.

de Plinval, 245 n.

Diospolis, Council of, 262 n.,
266 n.

Divine Ideas, dependence of
soul upon, 177; and Divine
"illumination," 177 n.

Empedocles, 52 n.

Epistola tractoria, of Pope
Zosimus, 245, 247.

eternal law, supreme wisdom,
85; definition of, 85; and
happiness, 102 f.; and hu-
man laws, 85.

Eulogius, Primate of Pales-
tine, 262 n.

evil, problem of, 72 ff.; Mani-
chaean view of, 66 f.; cause
of, 72 fF; turning from
changeless good, 162.

Evodius, 70 ff; correspond-
ence with Augustine, 70 n.;
Bishop of Uzala, 246.

existence, always preferable
to non-existence, 181 ff.; in-
stinctive desire for, 185.

faith, primacy of, 75; and
good works, 269 ff; a gift,
269 £., 281 f.

Faustus of Riez, 248 n.

fear of the Lord, a grace, 295.

Felix, monk of Hadrumetum,
246.

Ferguson, J., 245 n.

form, and changeable reality,
154.

313

fortitude, 98.

four elements, theory of, 52 n.

free will, cause of evil, 106;
why given to man, 107 ft.;
taught by the Scriptures,
251 ff.

Gannon, M. A., 52 n.

Gellius, A., Noctes Atticae,
39 n.

Gilson, E., 88 n., 110 n., 113 n.

God, attributes of, 75 £.; ex-
istence of, demonstrated,
113 f£; foreknowledge of,
and human freedom, 168 ff.

good will, 95, 100.

good works, necessity of, 269
ff.

grace, Augustine's works on,
245 n.; taught by Scripture,
258 f£; not result of merit,
265 fL; not the Law, 275
ff; not result of good will,
283 f; operans and coop-
erans, 289 n.; efficacious and
inefficacious, 289 n.; neither
the Law nor knowledge of
the Law nor mere remission
of sins, 280; not destructive
of freedom, 297; dispensa-
tion of, 306 f.

Grabowski, S., 173 n.

Green, W. M., 58 n., 70 n., 192
n.

Hadrumetum, monks of, 246.
Hagendahl, H., 26 n.

Hai, city of, 298.

Hamman, A., 246 n.
314

happy life, 100, 161; desired
but not achieved by all, 100
f; and eternal law, 102 f.

Heros, Bishop of Arles, 262 n.

Honoratus, friend of Augus-
tine, 51 n.

"ignorance" and “difficulty,”
effects of original sin, 212
ff., 222 f.

"illumination," Divine, 4 f£,
5 π., 51, 54 n., 78, 110 n.;
and Divine Ideas, 177 n.

inner sense, existence and
function of, 116 £.; superior
to external senses, 121 f.

Inner Truth, 51, 54, 59.

Innocent, Pope, 247.

Institutio oratoria, of Quin-
tilian, 39 n.

intellect, objects of, 53.

intellectus, 88 n.

intelligentia, 88 n.

intelligible realities, perceived
in inner light, cannot be
taught, 54 f.

"interior man," 8, 51, 54.

Jarom, 301.

Jeroboam, 800.

Jerome, St., 68, 218 n.
Joas, King of Israel, 301.
Josue, 298.

justice, 98.

knowledge, and belief, 50 £.;
and understanding, 50 f.;
sensual and intellectual, 52-
54.

INDEX

law, divine and human, 82 ff.;
eternal and temporal, 84.

Lazarus, Bishop of Aix, 262 n.

Lecerf, J., 58 n.

Leckie, G., 5 n.

Lewis, G., 114 n.

love, perfect and imperfect,
288 ἢ; greater than knowl-
edge, 297.

Lynch, L., 88 n.

man, defined, 37.

Manichaeism, embraced by
Augustine, 66, 75 n.; dual-
ism of, 66 f.; identifies sun
with God, 180 n.

Marrou, H., 50 n.

Massilienses, 248 n.

memory, and sense impres-
sions, 53.

Meno, of Plato, 5 n.

mens, 88 n.

Misael, 50.

Molina, 178 n.

Monica, St., mother of Augus-
tine, 65, 70, 246 n.

Morán, J., 110 n.

Morin, Dom, 246 n.

Moses, 146 n.

Most, W., 140 n.

nature, every nature good, 199
£5; and substance, 200; how
corrupted, 201 ff; analog-
ical term, 214.

Nebridius, 4 n.

Noctes Atticae, of Gellius, 39
n.

nomen, derivation of, 22.
INDEX

nouns, and signs, 17, 22; defi-
nition of, 22; and other
parts of speech, 23-25; and
terms, 28; general and par-
ticular, 27-29.

number, perception of, 129
ff; and wisdom, 133, 139
ff.; and beauty, 151 ff.

Nun, father of Josue, 298.

Ontologism, 146 n.

Optatus, Augustine's letter to,
245 n.

Oracle, Inner, 61.

original sin, cause of "ignor-
ance" and "difficulty," 212
fr, 222 ff.; transmission of,
306.

passion (libido), source of sin,
78; and desire, 78-80; evil
effects of, 93 f.

Paul, St., 24 ff.; 251 et passim.

Pelagius, 67 ff.; at Council of
Diospolis, 21 f, 266 n;
identified grace with the
Law, 275 ft; grace not
needed to avoid sin, 279 f£.;
reaction of, to Augustine's
Confessions, 285 n.

Pelagianorum reliquiae, 948
n.

Persius 3.32, 41 f.

Phaedo, 45 n.

Pharao, 298.

philarguría, 209.

Plato, 5, 158 n.

Platonists, and Christian
teaching, 52 n.

315

Plotinus, 51 n.; Enneads of,
151 n.; on evil, 165 n.

Porphyry, 51 n.

Possidius, Augustine's first
biographer, 67 n.; Indicu-
lum of, 72 n.

pronoun, defined, 22.

prudence, 97.

Puech, H. C., 66 n.

Punic language, 58.

Pythagoreanism, 140 n.

Quintilian, Institutio orator-
ia, 39 n.

ratio, 88 n.

rational creatures, apex of
creation, 205.

reason, distinctive of man, 87,
123; and virtue, 89; knows
itself and sense powers, 120.

Republic, of Plato, 153 n.

Retractations, Two Books of,
Augustine's review of his
works, 3, 52 n., 60 n., 65 n.,
67 n., 68, 73; Book 1, Ch. 9,
235-241.

Ries, J., 66 n.

Roboam, 300.

Sage, A., 287 n.

sapientia, 50 n.

saraballae, 47 f.

scientia, 50 n.

Schützinger, C., 54 n., 110 n.
scire and credere, 50 n.
Secundinus, Manichaean, 69.
self-defense, morality of, 81 ff.
Semei, son of Gera, 298.
316

Semi-Pelagianism, 248.

seminal reasons, doctrine of,
52n.

sensation, Augustine
Aquinas on, 52 n.

senses (external), messengers
of mind, 52; objects of, 52;
number and specific objects
of, 115 ff.; known by reason,
116; see also inner sense.

Septuagint, 50 n., 75 n.

signs, and words, 10-12, 16;
and gestures, 12-16; kinds
of, 16, 29; and nouns, 17-
22; indicated by other signs,
16; and “signifiables,” 17;
self-signifying, 20; recipro-
cal, 20-23; cannot alone en-
gender knowledge, 46-49;
compared with things and
knowledge, 3842; whether
required to indicate actions,
42 ft.

sin, cause of, 72 ff; turning
from changeless good, 162
£; an analogical term, 214.

Sixtus, Roman priest (later
Sixtus III), 245.

Socrates, 39 n., 45 n.

soul, views on origin of, 215-
222.

Sousse (Tunisia), identified
with ancient Hadrumetum,
246 n.

spiritual generationism, 218 n.

suicide, 186 f.

and

Tagaste, birthplace of Augus-
tine, 8, 65.

INDEX

Teacher, the Inner, 51, 60, 61.
teaching, and recalling, 7-9.
temperance, 98.
temporal laws, jurisdiction of,
103 £.; and eternal law, 85.
Terence, Andria, 18 n.
"Thomas Aquinas, St., 5 n.
truth, present in the mind, 51;
and moral dispositions, 51;
identified with Christ, 51;
same for all, 137, 142 f;
superior to mind, 143 f.;
and happiness, 144 ff.; In-
ner Teacher of, 148.

understanding, and belief, 50
f.
Uzala, 246.

Valentine,
246.

verbum, derivation of, 22.

Vergil, Aeneid, 10 n.

Verrine Orations, of Cicero,
26.

vice, contrary to nature, 203.

videre and credere, 50 n.

vituperatio, derivation of, 203.

of Hadrumetum,

Weigel, G., 5.

will, self-determining, 96;
root of happiness and un-
happiness, 99 f, 106; an
“intermediate” good, 160;
necessary for moral life,
162; cause of sin, 209 ff.;
subject to God, 303.

Wisdom, and highest good,
184 ff; same for all, 139;
and number, 139 ff.
INDEX 317

words, defined, 18; and nouns,
18-20; naturally suggest re-
alities, 37 £; do not alone
cause knowledge, 49 f., 55,
60.

Zosimus, Pope, Epistola trac-
toria of, 245, 247.
INDEX
OF HOLY SCRIPTURE

(Booxs or THE Orp TESTAMENT)

Genesis 1 Paralipomenon
2.5: 281. 28.9: 263.
Exodus 2 Paralipomenon
15.2: 262.
21.16-17: 301.
25.7-8: 301.
25.20: 802.
19.18: 292. Esther
Deuteronomy 15.10-11: 802.
6.4-5: 292. Psalms
8.17-18: 268. 1.2: 258.
Josue 4.5-6: 9.
7.12: 298. 5.12: 272.
11.20: 298. 13.1: 111, 157.
2 Kings 18.13.14: 193.
247: 211.
26.9: 258, 265.
26.83: 287.
17.14: 300. 29.7: 265.
3 Kings 29.8: 265.
12.15: 800. 31.9: 253.
4 Kings 31.9: 256.
14.10: 302. 33.14: 286.

819
320

35.4: 256.
36.4: 144,
38.2: 287.
40.5: 169.
41.7: 231.
48.22: 268.
51.27: 154.
67.19: 261.
78.6: 256.
79.4: 284.
83.8: 293.
88.11: 284.
84.5.7: 284.
84.7.5: 262.
94.8: 282, 284.
100.1: 306.
102.4: 278.
104.25: 308.

140.3: 286, 287.

Proverbs

1.8: 253.

1.81: 258.

2.6: 297.

3.7: 258.

3.11: 258, 261.
3.16: 293.
3.27: 258.
3.29: 258.

5.2: 253.

8.35: 287.
9.14: 259.
19.8: 252, 303.
21.1: 802.
29.19: 257.

INDEX

36.8: 253.
Canticle of Canticles

8.5: 265.
Wisdom

4.11: 806.

6.18: 156.

7.27: 155.

8.1: 140.

8.21: 260.
Ecclesiasticus [Sirach]

15.11-17: 258.

1.18: 266.

7.9: 50, 75, 113.

11.2: 297.

11.23: 295.
Jeremia

17.5: 257.
Ezechiel

11.19: 282.
11.19.20: 282.
14.9: 302, 307.
18.81-32: 284.
36.22-27: 288.
36.26: 285.
36.27: 287.
Daniel

3.94: 47.

(Books or THE NEW TESTAMENT)

Matthew

5.17: 279.
6.6: 8.

6.12-13: 279.
6.19: 254.
72: 113.
254.

16.27: 255, 272, 307.
18.11: 279.

19.10-11: 259.

12.28-81: 292.
Luke
2.14: 254.
12.4: 295.
12.5: 295.
12.48.47: 256.
19.10: 279.
20.86: 192.
22.82: 261.
John
1.16: 272.
8.27: 267.
6.66: 262.
8.81.82: 146.
9.39: 306.
13.34-35: 292.
14.87: 288.
15.5: 266, 271.
15.13: 288.
15.16: 294.
15.22: 251.
17.8: 118.
Romans
1.17: 269.
1.18-20: 252.
1.21: 281.
1.22: 231.
1.24: 26, 28, 303.
2.6: 270, 272.

321

2.12: 255.
3.8: 305.
3.20: 274.
3.28: 269.
4.4: 268, 270.
4.5: 284.
4.15: 274.
5.3.5: 295.
5.20: 805.
6.14: 278.
6.23: 271, 373.
7.6: 274.
7.118: 275.
7.19.18: 211.
8.12-18: 276.
8.14: 276.
8.28: 289.
8.35-39: 290.
8.36-37: 268.
9.16: 268.
9.18: 307.
9.22: 298.
10.8: 276.
10.14: 281.
11.5-6: 270.
11.80-82: 805.

12.8: 278, 281.
12.21: 287, 260.
18.8: 290.
18.8-10: 288.
16.18: 39.
Corinthians
1.19: 24.
1.28-24: 51.
2.12: 296.
3.2.8: 282.
822 INDEX

3.5: 268. 2.21: 279.

3.6: 272. : 5.6: 270.
3.16: 8. 5.18-14: 290.
3.17: 208. 5.17: 211.
4.7: 267. Ephesians

4.15: 281. 2.8: 214.
5.17.18: 272. 2.8: 269, 281.
6.1: 263. 2.9: 269.

6.3: 192. 3.14-17: 51.
7.7: 259, 273. 3.16-17: 8.
7.25: 269, 281. 3.19: 296.
7.82: 259. 4.8: 267, 271.
7.86-87: 254. 4.10: 271.
7.97; 259. 6.6-7: 254.
8.1: 296. 6.28: 281, 296.
8.11: 254. Philippians
9.17: 254. 1.6: 289.
111 1.29: 281.
12.81: 5 2.12: 278.
13.1-8: 290. 2.18: 278, 287, 289.
18.4: 297. 3.8-9: 277.
13.13-14.1: 290. 3.12: 251.
15.9: 263. 3.15: 251.
15.10: 263, 264. 3.16: 25.
15.84: 254. Colossians
15.5 3.14: 290.
15.5' 1 Thessalonians
16.14: : 1.78: 256.
2 Corinthians 3.12: 294.
1.19: 24. 5.14-15: 291.
B 2 Thessalonians
1.8: 294.
2.10-11: 308.
3.2: 279.
5.17-18: 272. 1 Timothy
6.1: 263. 1.5: 291.
11.16: 25. 1.18: 211.
Galatians 4.14: 254.

2.16: 275. 5.22: 259.
INDEX 323

6.10: 209. 4.11: 255.
2 Timothy 12.2: 260.
1.7: 295, 297. Philemon
1.8.9: 264. 14: 254.

3.12: 254. I Peter

4.6-7: 266. 3.9: 807.

4.7: 267. 48: 291.

4.8: 266. 1 John
Titus 1.5: 296.

2.2-18: 308. 2.10: 291.

8.8: 264. 2.15: 255.

3.4-7: 264. 3.1: 296.
James 5.10: 291.

1.5: 308. 3.23: 291.

1.7: 267. 4.7: 298, 297.

1.13-15: 252.

1.14: 260.

2.1: 254.

2.8: 291.

2.19: 270.

3.14-17: 308.

3.17: 308.
