CONTENTS

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL

Introduction

Text

THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL

Introduction

Text

ON MUSIC

Introduction

Text

THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING

Introduction

Text

ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN

Introduction
Text
INTRODUCTION

THE PROBLEM of the soul’s immortality has ever ar-
rested the attention of serious thinkers.! The very
hours before his death, Socrates, ‘the best, the’ wisest
and the noblest man,’ spent with his friend Crito in discussing
this persistent and fascinating subject. To Augustine of Hippo
belongs the distinction of having been the first philosopher
in the Christian Tradition of the West to compose a formal
treatise on the immortality of the soul. In his Soliloquia the
young Augustine had already exclaimed: ‘First of all I should
like to know if I am immortal.’*

Some authors* do not seem to appreciate the originality of
Augustine's thought on this problem and present his solution
simply as a mere imitation of the Greek philosophers, espe-
cially Plato. On the other hand, among those who discuss
more thoroughly Augustine's teachings on the survival of the
soul and who acknowledge its distinctive merits in the history
of philosophy may be included M. Kreutle, G. von Hertling,*
W. P. O'Connor, and M. Grabmann.’


4 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Augustine’s reasons for the immortality of the soul are
basically rooted first, in the human mind, and second, in
Christian teaching. While his psychological® and theological
reasons were to be developed and perfected in some of his
later writings, such as De civitate Dei and De Trinitate?
the rational demonstration is stressed in the prime of his
intellectual and spiritual awakening. His fifth work, De im-
mortalitate animae, is devoted expressly to the solution of this
problem.

When Augustine, in later years, describes’? this treatise as
an imperfect and ‘obscure’ draft that, without his knowledge
and intention, had come into the hands of others, it is more
the form than the content that receives his censure. Although
medieval and modern scholarship has done a great deal for
the development of psychology, the science of the soul,
Augustine’s De immortalitate animae has lost nothing of its
peculiar value and charm in the course of time.’* In spite of
its aphoristic and unpolished form, it is, for the spontaneity
and the philosophical spirit of the young author, appraised
by some!? as the most interesting work Augustine wrote in
his youth. Medieval thinkers!? were attracted by its precious
and timeless thoughts on being, life, substance, thinking,
truth, virtue, eternity, and time. Its careful perusal will
afford also to the modern reader, who is fond of dialectics,
psychology, or even psychoanalysis, hours of delight and
inspiration. E. Gilson refers to it quite frequently, and

8 The desire to survive is fundamental and common to all men. Cf.
De civ. dei 11, 27, 1.

9 Cf. De civ. dei 10, 29.1 and De Trin. 134.7 ff.

10 Retractationes 1.5.1. The Retractationes contain Augustine's own record
and a personal review of his prolific literary career.

11 J. McCabe, Saint Augustine and His Age (London 1910) 164.

12 W. Heinzelmann, Augustins Lehre von der Unsterblichkeit 31 n. 20.

13 Cf. P, Pomponazti, De immortalitate animae (Messina-Roma 1925) 122.

14 E. Gilson, Introduction d l'Etude de Saint Augustin 658. and’ passim
(Paris 1943) .

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 5

scholars like J. Barion, E. Przywara, and others regard it as

a valuable source.

The Immortality of the Soul is also of great interest for an
understanding and an evaluation of Augustine's personal
development. Augustine's philosophical progress is closely
connected with his personal experience; his philosophy grows
and develops in the same rhythm as his restless mind strives
for the truth, and as his heart, with an ever increasing flame,
burns for happiness.

This short work was written at Milan shortly after Augus-
tine's return from Cassiciacum, where he had written the
following books:!5 Contra Academicos (Answer to Skeptics),
De beata vita (The Happy Life), De ordine (Divine Provi-
dence and the Problem of Evil) and Soliloquia (Soliloquies).
In Contra Academicos he refutes skepticism and proves the
existence of an incontestable truth; De beata vita deals with
the longing for happiness in everyone's soul, that happiness
which finds its fulfillment only in the possession of God, the
highest Truth and supreme Good; in De ordine he praises
this God, the Ordo Ipse, who in His love has created and
well ordered the world and everything in the world, from the
brook that flows with an ever changing rhythm, up to man,
the most perfect creature on earth. Each man, as an animal
rationale mortale, is endowed'* with the faculty of reason-
ing (ratione uti ). He is made in the image of God, and
thus, by a sacred indissoluble bond, united with his Creator
and the soul of his fellow man. In De ordine" Augustine has
15 The translations of these four books are contained in the first

volume of St. Augustine's works in this series.

16 De ordine 2.11.32. For the difference between rational and ‘rationable,’
cf. L. Schopp, The Happy Life 9. In De moribus ecclesiae Catholicae
127.52 we find the definition: 'Man is a rational soul using a
mortal and earthly body; which later (De Trinitate 15.7.11) was

replaced by: "Man is a rational substance consisting of soul and body."
17 De ordine 2.847.

6 SAINT AUGUSTINE

already come to the conclusion that there are only two worth-
while questions in the realm of philosophy: ‘one about the
soul, the other about God.’ Consequently, in his Soliloquia
the knowledge of ‘God and soul"* becomes the final goal of
his ardent prayers and search. Here, he speaks of the im-
mortality of the soul and promises another volume devoted
to a more careful investigation of this question, a promise
he kept in writing De immortalitate animae.

The peaceful days of physical relaxation, the delightful
hours of philosophical discussions and of spiritual meditation
and practice, which Augustine had enjoyed during his stay
on the estate of Verecundus in Cassiciacum, have gone.
He has returned with his companions to Milan and is now
expecting to be officially received into the Church of Christ.’*
Yet, before bowing his head in the baptismal font," he wishes
to follow his inner urge to investigate the problem of the
immortality of his soul. Here, again, we see how closely and
realistically Augustine's thinking is interwoven with his life.
He is not so much interested either in the general qualities"!
or in the origin?" of the soul; primarily, it is the question

18 Soliloquia 1.27.

19 Augustine was baptized by St. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, on Holy
Saturday, in the year 387. with his son Adeodatus and ‘the brother
ot his heart; Alypius.

20 H. H. Lesaar's opinion, in Saint Augustine, trans. from the German
by T. Pope Arkell (London 1931) 130, that De immortalitate animae
was written after Augustine's baptism, is contradicted by Augustine's
Retractationes 1.5.7. O'Connor's statement (op. cit. 12) that the work
was written after Augustine's baptism ‘at Cassiciacum shortly after his
return from Milan’ is, of course, erroneous.

21 This question is treated in De quantitate animae, written at Rome
in 388.

22 Augustine speaks of the origin of the soul in the beginning of De
quantitate animae and also, much later (419), in De anima et eius
Origine; see also the tenth book of De genesi ad litteram (413).
Augustine later (Retractationes 1.8.2, 1.4.4, and De Trinitate 12.15.24)
refutes his previous assumption of the pre-existence of the soul in
the Platonic sense, without, however, giving any clear opinion as
THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 7

of the ultimate end of his soul that stirs his mind and makes
him search for a philosophical justification before he takes
the decisive step. Not that Augustine is not deeply convinced
of the immortality of the soul in accordance with the Chris-
tian faith (auctoritas), which he already had rated higher
than ratio, in Contra Academicos." However, if neither the
name of Christ nor any of those genuinely Christian™ elements
which appear in the four writings mentioned above is found
in this treatise, this is to be explained from Augustine's inten-
tion to study here the problem of immortality from the
rational point of view only.

How does Augustine proceed, to prove the immortality
of the soul?

First, as in his earlier Soliloquia,' he establishes the fact
that the soul, because it knows most certainly of its own
faculty of reasoning?! must exist, must be a reality. This
reality must be a living substance, since only a living substance
is able to reason." In examing more thoroughly the essence,
qualities, and faculties of different substances—for instance,
all corporeal substances are changeable, occupy space, arid
can be cut endlessly into parts—Augustine concludes that
the soul cannot be corporeal, but must necessarily be an

to his view of the soul's origin. As to the four hypotheses mentioned
in this connection, see E. Gilson, of. cit, and Bourke, Augustine's
Quest of Wisdom.

23 8.2043. -

24 Ct. A. Dyroff, Uber Form und Begriffsgehalt der augustinischen
Schrift. De ordine, called ‘the most important article on the Augus-
tinian dialogues’ by E. T. Silk, ‘Boethius’ Consolatio philosophiae as a

uel to Augustine's Dialogues and Soliloquia/ Harvard Theological
Review $2 (1939) . Cf. also L. Schopp, The Happy Life (Introduction) ;
gj 20, A. C. Pegis, "The Mind of St. Augustine,

26 De immortalitate animae 1.1.

27 Ibid. 22.
8 SAINT AUGUSTINE

incorporeal substance. Although this incorporeal substance is
an independent entity,”* and distinct from its psychical’® ac-
tions it is the seat of science, the principles and contents of
which are true; for ‘the sum of two and two is four'?? as well
as ‘a straight line drawn through the center of a circle is longer
than any other line not drawn through the center," are state-
ments based upon true principles that are immutable. They
are true only through the truth. Since there is no interruption?"
in the existence of the truth, it must be everlasting; since
the truth can only exist in an incorporeal substance that is
alive, and is inseparably connected with it as with its sub-
ject, this incorporeal substance, i.e., the soul, must everlast-
ingly live. Thus, the soul is immortal.

Without examining Augustine's dependence? upon the
Greeks, it will suffice for our purpose to point out that before
his baptism he speaks, in a truly Christian spirit, of an
incorporeal, individual-substantial human soul and furnishes

28 Augustine (ibid) shows the continuity of one's own self and its
ditlerence from subsequent psychical occurrences within it, by stating
that someone (eg. the artist) is able to execute an idea that he
holds presently in his mind and expects to materialize in the course
of time, only through keeping the idea unchanged in his mind, i.e,
through his memory.

29 Ibid. 4.6.

30 Ibid. 22.

31 Ibid. 11

32 Ibid.

33 Although Augustine's philosophy basically follows Plato more than
Aristotle (see De civitate Dei 8.12), we have already pointed out
that Augustine, through a Neo-Pythagorean (probably Nicomachus
of Gerasa), was more familiar with the doctrine of Aristotle than
generally assumed (see L. Schopp, ‘Der Wahrheitsbegriff; Dyroff,
op. ciL; and Schopp, The Happy Life). De immortalitate animae
contains Aristotelian as well as Platonic elements. We here would
differ from first, Wérter (op. cit. 14) who finds only Neo-Platonic
ideas, and, second, Nourrisson (of. cit. II, 308), who asserts that the
Augustinian teaching of the soul is a direct imitation of the
Aristotelian doctrine. See also O'Connor, op. cit. 27, and W. Thimme,
Augustins erster Entwurf einer metaphysischen Seelenlehre (Berlin
1908.

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 9

rational arguments for its survival after the death of the body;
furthermore, that he does not understand this survival in
the sense of the Platonic or Plotinian doctrine of reincarna-
tion in beasts,** or, like Porphyry, as the rebirth of the soul
in other human beings.

De immortalitate animae was written between March 10
(Ash Wednesday) and April (Easter Sunday), 387, since
those who wanted to receive baptism had to register as
electi or competentes at the beginning of the Lenten season.
Aurelius was at that time in his thirty-third year. This treatise
differs in some respect from Augustine’s earlier writings. It
does not have the form of a dialogue and, as the Soliloquia, is
without dedication.** It gives the impression of being a mere
set of premises and conclusions, that sometimes are not fully
developed.

This translation is based on the text of Migne, PL 32 1021
ff., and all relevant supplementary material has been used.

The task of the translator has not been an easy one, which
will be no surprise in the light of Augustine's own words
in his Retractationes:?* “The reasoning is involved and too
briefly expressed and its resultant obscurity was such that my
attention flagged as I read it, and I could hardly understand
it myself."

34 Augustine, De civitate Dei 10.30. For Augustine's dependence upon

Plato and Plotin see Kreutle, op. cit. 346.

35 Contra Academicos was dedicated to his friend and protector

Romanianus, De beata vita to his friend Theodorus, De ordine to his
friend Zenobius.

SAINT AUGUSTINE

CONTENTS

Chapter Page
1. The soul is the subject of a science which always is . . 15
2. The soul is the subject of an unchanging reason . . . 17

3. The mind is a living and immutable substance; if in some
way mutable, it would not therefore be mortal . . . 18

4. The art and immutable reason of numbers; both dwell in
the mind; life never absent . . . . . . . .22

5. The mind does not change so as to become not a mind. . 24

6. Unchangeable reason cannot be separated from the mind,
whether it is in the mind, or whether the mind is init. 27

7. The mind, even if it tends through its substance to some

defect, does not on that account perish . . . . .29
8. Just as the body cannot lose its being- body, s so can the

mind not lose its being-mind — . . 81
9. The mind, being life, cannot be without it . . . . 34
10. The mind is not an organization of the body . . . . 35

11. Even though truth is the cause of the mind's being, the
mind does not perish Ed falsity, t the E of

truth 0... s s : a n .37
12. Nothing is contrary to the truth, which, insofar as it is,

is the source of the mind's being . . . . . .38
13. The mind is not changed into a body . . . . .40
14. The power of the soul is undiminished by sleep or any

similar influence of the body . . . . . . .42
15. Soul cannot be changed into body . . . . . . 43

16. Rational soul does not change into irrational soul. The
whole soul is in all the body and in each of its parts. 45
THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL

Chapter 1

If Science exists anywhere, and if it can exist only in
the realm of that which lives and always is, and if
anything, in which something else dwells forever,
must itself always be, then that must live forever in which
science exists.
If we who reason exist, that is, if our mind? does, and if
correct reasoning? without science is impossible—and only a
mind in which science does not exist can be without science
—then science exists in the mind of man.

Moreover, science is somewhere, for it exists, and whatever
exists cannot be nowhere. Again, science can exist only in
that which lives. For nothing that does not live learns any-
thing, and science cannot possibly exist in something that
does not learn.*

Again, science exists always. For whatever exists and is
immutable must necessarily exist always. On the other hand
nobody denies that science exists. And whoever asserts that
only the straight line drawn through the center of a circle is
longer than any other line not drawn through the center,
and that this statement belongs in the realm of science, as
much as admits that there is an immutable science.

Also, nothing in which something else exists always, cannot
be but always. Nothing, however, that always is ever suffers
the loss from itself of that in which it always exists.

And, when we reason, it is an act of our mind; for only
that reason which understands can reason. Neither the body
understands, nor the mind, aided by the body, understands,
because, when the mind wishes to understand, it is turned
away from the body.* That which is understood is so always;
nothing, however, pertaining to the body is so always.’
Truly, the body is not able to be of aid to the soul in its
striving toward understanding, since it cannot even be of
hindrance.

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL

Moreover, no one reasons correctly without science.’ Cor-
rect reasoning, of course, is the cogitation [the way of think-
ing] that advances, to the investigation of things not certain,
from principles that are certain; nothing is certain in the
mind of which it has no knowledge.

But, all that the mind knows it possesses within itself;
knowledge does not encompass anything except those things
that pertain to some branch of science.? For, science is the
knowledge of all things.’°

The human mind, therefore, lives always.

Chapter 2

(2) Reason, certainly, is either the mind or it is in the
mind. Our reason, to be sure, is of better quality than our
body; our body, in turn, is some kind of a substance,’ and
it is better to be a substance than nothing. Therefore, reason
is not nothing. Again, whatever the harmonic structure of
a body is, it is by necessity inseparably present in the body as

SAINT AUGUSTINE

in a subject; nothing else can be believed to be in that
structure which is not with equal necessity in that respective
body, in which also the structure itself is not less inseparably
present.”

The human body, however, is subject to change, and
reason is immutable. For, all is subject to change that does
not exist always in the same way. It is always in the same
way that two and four make six. In the same way, it is always
true that four is the sum of two and two; this [four], how-
ever, is not two; and two, naturally, is not four. Such reason-
ing is not subject to change;* therefore reason exists.

In no way, on the other hand, can that which is inseparably
in a subject? remain unchanged, after the subject itself is
changed. The mind, in turn, is not the structure of the body.
Nor can death occur to things not subject to change. The
mind, therefore, always lives, whether it itself is reason, or
whether reason is inseparably attached to it.

Chapter 3

(3) Constancy possesses some power [virtus], and all
that is constant is not subject to change. Every power is able
to perform some act, being a power even when not in

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

action. Every action,” in turn, is moved, or causes moving.
Hence, not all that is moved, and certainly not all that causes
moving, is subject to change.* Moreover, all that is moved
by another and does not cause its own moving is something
mortal. But, whatever is mortal is subject to change. Con-
sequently, one may quite surely and without opposition con-
clude that not all that causes moving is subject to change.

There is no motion without substance; each substance
either lives or does not live. But, all that does not live is with-
out soul and no action occurs without soul. Therefore,
anything that causes moving in such a way that it does not
undergo any change can only be a living substance. But, as a
whole, this moves the body gradually. Hence, not everything
that moves the body is mutable.

The body, however, is moved only in time, for which
reason it is moved more slowly or more quickly; consequently
there is something that, while it causes moving in time, is
yet not changed itself.

SAINT AUGUSTINE

But, all that moves the body in time, no matter how it may
tend toward one end, is still unable to do all at the same
time. It can do only several things; for, that which can be
cut into parts is unable to be perfectly one;* irrespective of
the aid engaged. Nor is any body without parts, nor time
without different intervals, nor may the shortest syllable be
pronounced in such a way that you hear its end when still
hearing its beginning. Morevoer, what is done in this man-
ner must be accompanied once by the expectation that it
can be completed and also by memory, in order to compre-
hend the measure of its capacity. Expectation’ has to do
with the things of the future; memory, with those of the
past. The intention to act lies in the present through which
the future lapses into the past, and the outcome of the motion
of a body, once started, cannot be expected without any
memory. For, how could one expect something to cease that
never either had a start or has, in no way, been moved.
Again, the intention that is present of bringing something
to an end cannot be carried out without expectation that
belongs to the future; further, that is not, which is either
not as yet, or is not any more. Hence, in the one who intends
to carry out something, there can exist something that really
[still] belongs in the realm of things not yet in existence.
For, several things can be simultaneously in the one who
acts, although the several things that are being done cannot

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

exist at the same time. Thus, in the one who moves there
can exist things, although they cannot be in that which is
moved. But, whatever things cannot be at the same time
and which, nevertheless, are passing from the future into
the past, are of necessity subject to change.

"Therefore, no one should think, if some change of bodies
is effected, that the mind, being the moving agent, necessarily
is changed or on account of this perhaps would die, no matter
how great its intention was in the change. For, it is able to
hold simultaneously in this intention the memory of the
past, as well as the expectation of things to come—all of
which cannot be without life.'?

Although there is no destruction without change and no
change without motion, nevertheless, not every change effects
destruction and not every motion reflects change. For, one

SAINT AUGUSTINE

may rightly state that our own body is moved in many ways,
by all kinds of actions, and certainly is changed by growing
older, but not that it has undergone destruction, meaning
that it is without life. Accordingly, one may forthwith believe
that the mind is not deprived of life, even though, through
motion, some change may, perhaps, affect it.

Chapter 4

(5) If, therefore, something changeless, which cannot
be without life, remains in the mind, it necessarily follows,
then, that life everlasting remains in the mind. For, it really
is so that, if the former statement is [correct], the second
must also be correct. And the former is correct.

Who, indeed, would dare to say, passing over other in-
stances, either that the principle [ratio] of numbers is
mutable; or that there exists any art' which is not based
on this principle [ratio]; or that the art is not in the artist,
even though he is not presently practicing it; or that he
possesses the art, without its being in his mind; or that it
could be where life is not; or that, what is immutable can at
any time not be; or that art is one thing and its underlying
principle [ratio] another. For, even if art as a whole may
be called a certain collection of principles [rationum], it can
almost truly be called one principle, and be understood as
such. But, whether this is the one way or the other, as a
matter of fact art is none the less immutable. It is evident,
however, not only that art is in the mind of the artist, but
also that it cannot be but in his mind, and inseparable from
it. For, if art is separated from the mind, it will be either

outside the mind, or nowhere; or it will pass continuously
From mind to mind.

But, since there is no place for art without life, so life
with reason belongs to nothing but the mind.* Moreover,
what exists cannot be nowhere, nor can what is immutable
at any time not exist. However, if art passes from mind to
mind, leaving the one, in order to dwell in the other, then
nobody teaches art without losing it, or, again, nobody
becomes educated but by the forgetting or the death of his
teacher.’ If these statements are most absurd and false, as
they really are, then the human mind is immortal.

(6) Τῇ, indeed, art exists at one time in the mind and at
another time does not, a state sufficiently known through
forgetting and ignorance, the logic of this argument in no way
supports the immortality of the mind, unless the antecedent
is invalidated in the following manner: Either there is some-
thing in the mind that is not actual in present thought, or the
art of music is not in a trained mind while, and as long as,
it is concerned only with geometry. This latter statement,
however, is false; hence, the former is true. But, the mind
is not aware that it possesses something, except what has
entered its thought. Therefore, something may be in the
mind of whose presence there the mind itself is not aware.
How long this unawareness persists is of no importance. For,
if the mind has concerned itself for so long a time with
other things that it is unable readily to pay attention to things
previously thought of, such a state of mind is called forget-
ting* or ignorance.

SAINT AUGUSTINE

But when, either reasoning with ourselves or being cleverly
questioned by another about certain liberal arts, we discover*
that those things we have found are nowhere else but in our
mind, and since discovering [invenire] is not the same as
making [facere] or causing [gignere]—otherwise the mind
would bring forth eternal things by means of temporal
discovery, for it often does discover eternal things; (what, for
instance, is so eternal as the principle [ratio] of a circle or
anything else in arts of this kind, and is it not understood
that they always have been and always will be?)—then it is
evident that the human mind is immortal, and that all true
principles are in its innermost regions,’ even though it may
appear as if, through want of actual knowledge or through
forgetting, it either does not possess them or has lost them.

Chapter 5

(7) Now, let us see to what extent we are able to accept

a change of the mind. For, granting that the mind is the

subject in which art exists and that the subject cannot under-

go any change unless that which is in the subject also be
changed, who of us can hold that art and principle [ratio]
are unchangeable in the mind, if the mind in which they exist
is proved changeable? Again, what change is greater than
that into contraries? And who denies that the mind—let
alone, other examples—sometimes is stupid and at other
times wise?

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

Therefore, let us first examine in how many ways that
which is called a change of the mind may be accepted. In
my opinion, these ways, quite evident and clear to us, are
two with regard to genus [kind], but manifold with regard
to species. For, the mind is changed, so to speak, either a
cording to the passions of the body or its own passions;
according to the passions of the body, by age, sickness, pain,
work, injury, and carnal desire; according to its own passions,
in turn, through desire, joy, fear, worry, zeal, and study.


(8) Since a combination of all these changes furnishes
no conclusive argument that the mind is mortal, there is
certainly no need to be afraid of any of them alone. How-
ever, it still remains to be seen that they do not contradict our
former conclusion, namely, that by changing the subject
everything in the subject necessarily be changed.

But, they furnish no contradiction. For, our conclusion
refers only to such a change of a subject as that through
which the subject is forced entirely to change its name. If,
for example, wax somehow changes from a white to a black
color, it remains, none the less, wax. It is also the same if it
changes to a round form from a square, or from soft to
hard, or from warm to cold. All these changes are within the
subject, and wax is the subject. And wax remains no more
and no less wax, even though these qualities are changed.
"Therefore, a change of those qualities can occur in the subject,
while the subject itself, in regard to its essence and its name,
is not changed.”


SAINT AUGUSTINE

If, however, the change of those qualities in the subject
be so great that that which was said to be subject can no
longer be called so at all—as when, for instance, the wax
through the heat of fire dissolves into the air and undergoes
this change in such a manner that we rightly conceive the
subject to be changed, because it was wax, and is wax no
longer—then in no way could anyone logically believe that
there remains any of those qualities which were in that subject
in so far as it was this subject.

(9) Therefore, if the soul, as stated above, is the subject
in which reason is inseparably present, then, by the same
logical necessity with which reason being in the soul is
proved, reason is immortal; so the soul, since the soul can be
only a living soul, and reason within the soul cannot be
without life. For, indeed, reason would remain under no
circumstances immutable, if its subject did not exist. This
however, would actually occur if the soul underwent such
a change that it would make the soul a no-soul, i.e., would
compel the soul to die.

But, none of these changes, effected either by the body
or by the soul itself (although it is not an unimportant
question whether some of these changes are effected by the
soul itself, i.e., so that the soul itself is their cause), has the
effect of making the soul a no-soul. Therefore, we do not have
to fear these changes, neither in themselves, nor, certainly, with
regard to our conclusions.

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

Chapter 6

(10) Hence, I see that we have to devote all our reason-
ing power to the task of knowing what reason is, and in how
many ways it may be defined, so that the immortality of the
soul may be established according to all these ways. Reason
is [a] the vision of the mind by means of which it beholds
the true, by itself and without the help of the body; or
[b] the contemplation itself of the true, without the aid of
the body; or (c) the true itself, which it beholds.

As to the first, no one will doubt that reason is in the mind;
about the second and third there may be some question.
But, the second, also, cannot be without the mind. With
regard to the third, the important question arises whether
the true itself, which the mind beholds without the aid of
the body, exists by itself and is not in the mind, or whether it
can exist without the mind.

But, howsoever this may be, the mind could not by itself
behold it, except through some kind of connection with the
true. For, all we contemplate’ we grasp by cogitation or
pereive through sense or intellect." And, all things that are
perceived through one of the senses are sensed as existing
outside of us and are contained in space, which, we affirm,
makes possible their perception. Those things that are
comprehended by the intellect, however, are comprehended
as existing nowhere else but in the comprehending mind
itself and, at the same time, as not contained in space.

SAINT AUGUSTINE

(11) Evidently, this connection of the beholding mind
and the true which it beholds is such that: either the mind is
the subject and the true inherent in the subject; or, contrari-
wise, the true is the subject and the mind is inherent in the
subject; or, both are substances.

However, if of the three the first holds true, the mind is
immortal as well as reason, because—according to our previ-
ous argumentation—reason can only exist in something that
is alive. The same logic is also valid in the second instance.
For, if that true which is called reason: does not contain any-
thing changeable, as it appears, then nothing can be changed
which is contained in the true as in a subject. Thus, the entire
struggle centers around the third hypothesis. For, if the mind
is a substance and if reason [the true] with which the mind
is connected is likewise a substance, one would not absurdly
believe that reason [the true] may remain, while the mind
could cease to exist. It is manifest, however, that the mind, as
long as it is not separated, but connected with reason [the
true], necessarily remains and lives.

By what force, then, can the mind be separated? Could it
be a corporeal force whose power is weaker, whose origin
is lower, and whose order* is less unified? Not at all. Could
it be by an animal force? But again, how could it work? Is
it so that a more powerful mind cannot contemplate reason
[the true] unless it has another mind separated from it? How-
ever, reason [the true] would not be wanting to a single one,
even if all minds together would contemplate it. And, because
nothing is more powerful than reason [the true] itself, than
which nothing is less changeable, the mind not yet connected
with reason [the true] can by no means be more powerful
than the one already connected with it.

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

It remains that either reason [the true] itself separates from
itself the mind, or the mind by its own volition is separated
from [the true]. However, there is no trace of envy in the
nature of reason [the true] to prevent it from offering itself to
the enjoyment of the mind. Then, everything, to the extent
of its higher level of being, is the cause of being to whatever
is connected with it, which is just the opposite of destruction.
But, the mind by its own will, one may say without too great
absurdity, may be separated from reason [the true]—provided
that an individual separation between things not contained
in space is possible at all. This latter statement, indeed, can
be directed against all the points above, against which we
have furnished other objections.

What then? May we conclude already that the mind is
immortal? Or that it can be extinguished, although it cannot
be separated from [the true]? However, if this force of
reason [the true], through its very connection, affects the
mind—for it cannot but affect it—it affects it certainly only
in such a way that it gives it its being. And reason [the true]
itself is there in the highest degree where changelessness is
conceived in the highest degree." Therefore, reason [the true]
forces that mind somehow to be, which it, from its own
being, affects. Thus, without separation from reason [the true],
the mind cannot be extinguished. But, a separation is impos-
sible, as we have reasoned above. Therefore, the mind can-
not perish.

Chapter 7
(12) On the other hand, the mind cannot turn away from
reason [the true]—in doing so it falls into foolishness—with-
out suffering a defect; for, just as the mind enjoys a more per-
fect being when turned toward reason [the true] and adher-
ing to it—because it adheres to something unchangeable
which is the truth! that is in the highest degree and primord-
ial—so, when turned away from reason [the true], the mind
has a less perfect being—and this means a defect. But, every
defect is tending toward nothing, and no destruction can be
more properly conceived than if that which has been some-
thing becomes nothing. Wherefore, a trend toward nothing
is a trend toward destruction. Why this [destruction] does
not fall upon the mind, although it is subject to defect, is
hard to say.

While we may concede here the foregoing premises, we
deny the conclusion that that which is tending toward nothing
perishes, i.e., that it actually reaches nothing. The correctness
of our denial may also be observed in the body.

Since each body is a part of the sensible world, the closer
it approaches the volume of the universe, the larger it is
and the more space it occupies; the more the body does this,
the larger is the body. For, the whole is larger than the part.
Wherefore, it is necessarily smaller when it is reduced. It
suffers a defect, then, when it is reduced. A body is naturally
reduced if something is taken away from it by way of cutting
off. From this it follows that through such taking away it
tends to nothing. But, no cutting off actually leads the body
to nothing. For, each part that remains is a body and oc-
cupies, to the extent of its quantity, some space. This is only


THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

possible for the reason that it has parts, into which it may
repeatedly be cut. Thus, there is no limit for a body being
reduced by means of unlimited cuttings; hence it can suffer
defects and tend toward nothing, though it is never able to
reach nothing.”

This can likewise be stated and conceived with regard to
space itself and to any interval whatever. For, if one takes
away, let us say, a half of such defined divisions, and again
the half of the remainder, and so forth, the interval will more
and more decrease, advancing toward a limit which, how-
ever, it will by no means reach.

How much less, then, have we to fear this in regard to the
mind. For, the mind is certainly better and more alive than
the body, since it is the mind that gives life to the body.

Chapter 8

(13) However, if not the material mass, but its form,
gives to the body its being'—a statement proved by invincible
logic—then the body is the more perfect, the better formed
and the more beautiful it is,’ just as it is so much the less
perfect, the uglier and the more deformed it is.* The latter
defect occurs to the body, not through cutting off some of
its mass—about which enough has been said already—but
by taking away its form.

SAINT AUGUSTINE

This point has to be carefully investigated and discussed so
that no one may venture the thought that the mind perishes
by such a defect. Furthermore, when the mind, while being
unwise, is deprived somewhat of its form, the belief may
arise that this privation can go so far that it despoils the mind
entirely of its form and, by this destruction, reduces it to
nothing and forces it to perish.

Therefore, if we would show that this [destruction into
nothing] cannot even befall the body—namely, that it is
deprived of that form through which it is body—we can
rightly demonstrate how much less the mind can be deprived
of that [form] through which it is mind. To be sure, no one
who has carefully examined himself will contest that any
mind whatever has to be given preference to any kind of
body.

(14) Thus, our reasoning may start with the proposi-
tion that nothing makes or begets itself; otherwise, it would
have been before it was. If the latter is untrue, the former
is true. Likewise, what has been neither made nor originated
and yet exists, must, by necessity, be eternal. Whosoever at-
tributes such a nature and excellence to any body commits
a grave error. But, why quarrel? To a far greater extent
we are forced to attribute such a nature to the mind. Thus,
in the case that a body is eternal, then certainly every mind
is eternal, because any mind is to be preferred to any body,
as are all eternal things to things not eternal.

Again, if—as correctly stated—the body is made, it is
made by the act of someone who is not inferior to the body;
otherwise, he would not have had the power to give to the
product that, whatever it is, in which the being of the
product consists. Nor could the maker have given this to a
product that is equal. For, the maker must have something
THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

for the making which is of a higher degree than what he
makes. For, it is not absurdly said of a begetter that he is
[in some way] identical with what is begotten by him.

Hence, the whole body has been made by some force and
nature more powerful and more excellent, at least not corpo-
real. If body was made by body, the whole body could not
have come into existence. For, our statement at the outset
of our reasoning, namely, that nothing could by itself come
into being, is indeed true. This force and incorporeal nature
which effected the whole body, however, preserves the whole
by its ever-present power. For, after the making, it did not
vanish and did not desert the thing made.

This substance, now, which is not a body, is—so to speak—
not moved in space, so that it cannot be separated from
that substance existing in space. Neither can that effective
power vanish so as not to hold together its product or to let
it ever lack its form, by which it is insofar it is at all.‘ For,
what does not exist through itself will certainly not exist if
deserted by that through which it exists. We cannot say,
however, that when the body was made it received also the
gift of being self-sufficient and self-supporting, in case it
should be deserted by its creator.

(15) If this is so, the mind, which evidently surpasses
the body, has this ability to a higher degree. Thus the mind's
immortality is immediately proved, in case it can exist through
itself. For, that which has this quality is by necessity incor-
ruptible and, therefore, cannot perish, because nothing deserts
itself. But, the mutability of the body is evident, as the whole
motion of the entire body sufficiently indicates. Hence, it
becomes clear to those who investigate carefully—as far as

SAINT AUGUSTINE

such a nature can be investigated—that, through ordered
mutability,’ the immutable is imitated. However, that which
exists through itself is not even in need of any motion, since
with the utmost abundance it exists for itself; every motion
is directed at another thing which is lacked by what is moved.

Thus, a form is present in the whole body, because a more
excellent nature supplies and conserves the things it has
made. This change, naturally, does not deprive the body of
being a body, but lets it pass from one form to another by a
well-ordered movement. For, not a single part of the whole
can be reduced to nothing, because that effecting force com-
prises the whole and, through its power, that neither works
nor is inactive, gives existence to everything that exists through
it insofar as it does exist.

Consequently, no one should deviate from reason to such
an extent as not to be certain that the mind surpasses the
body, or—if this is conceded—as to believe that the body
never could not be a body, but that the mind could not be
mind. Because this never happens to the mind, and the mind
cannot exist without life, the mind surely never dies.

Chapter 9

(16) 1 someone declares the mind should not fear that
destruction which effects a thing, which had being before,
to become nothing, but the kind of destruction that makes us
call those things dead that are wanting life, he should be
aware of the fact that no thing lacks itself.

But, mind is a certain principle of life. Thus, it is under-
stood that everything animated is alive, while all that is
inanimated, but can be animated, is dead, i.e., deprived of
life. Therefore, the mind cannot die. Moreover, if the mind

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

could ever be in need of life, it would not be mind, but
something animated. If the latter is absurd, the mind has
far less to fear this kind of destruction, that even life in no
way has to fear.

Hence, to be sure, if the mind dies at the moment when
that life deserts it, the life itself that deserts the mind is
more correctly understood as being the mind, so that what-
soever is deserted by life is not so much the mind as the
deserting life itself. For, if anything is considered deserted by
life and dead, it is understood that it is deserted by the soul;
however, this life deserting the things that die, is itself the
mind, and does not desert itself. Thus, the mind does not die.*

Chapter 10

(17) Or perhaps we ought to believe—as some have done
—that life is some kind of organization [temperatio] of the
body. Of course, this thought would never have occurred
to them, if by means of the same mind—withdrawn from the
habit of bodies and purified—they had been able to see
those things that have true’ being and remain changeless.

Who, indeed, in the pursuit of a thorough self-introspection,
has not experienced that his understanding of things became
more adequate to the extent of his ability to withdraw and
remove his mental intention from the senses of the body?
If the mind were an organization of the body, this would
have been impossible.

SAINT AUGUSTINE

For, a thing which had no nature of its own and was not
a substance, but, as with color and shape, was present in a
body inseparably, would in no wise try to turn away from
that body toward the perception of intellectual things, and
would, so far as possible, be able to behold them and,
through this vision, become better and more excellent. In
no way, indeed, can shape, or color, or even that very organi-
zation of the body—being a certain mixture of the four
elements of which the body is composed—turn away itself
from that body, in which it is as in a subject inseparably
inherent.

Moreover, those things understood by the mind, when the
latter turns away from the body, are surely not corporeal—
and. still they are and exist in the highest degree because
they keep themselves always unchanged.

Nothing could be more absurd? than to say that the objects
seen by our eyes have being, while those things which we
discern with our intellect do not; since only a fool would
doubt the fact that the intellect has an incomparably higher
rank than our eyes.

However, when the mind sees those things which it per-
ceives as keeping themselves unchanged, it shows sufficiently
that it is associated with them in a marvelous, though not
corporeal, way, i.e., not in space. For, either they are in the
mind, or the mind itself is in them. Regardless of which one
of these statements is correct, either [a] one is in the other
as in a subject or else [b] either one is a substance.

But, if the first [a] is correct, then the mind is not in the
body as in its subject, as color and shape are, because mind
is either itself a substance or it inheres in the subject of
another substance that is not a body. But if the second [b]
is true, the mind does not inhere in the body as in its subject,
as color, because it is a substance. Yet, the organization of
the body inheres in the body as in its subject, as color does.
The mind, therefore, is not the organization of the body, but
the mind is life. Again, no thing abandons itself, and only
that dies which is abandoned by life. Therefore, the mind does
not die.*

Chapter 11

(18) Again, the only thing to be feared is that the mind
perish by defect, ie., that it may be deprived of the form
that gives it existence.’ Although, as I think, enough has been
said about this matter and although it has been dem-
onstrated by sure reasoning that this is impossible, never-
theless, attention should be paid to the point that the only
cause for fear lies in the undeniable fact that a foolish mind
is in some state of defect, while the wise enjoys a more
stable and fuller being.

SAINT AUGUSTINE

But if, as cannot be doubted, the mind is then most wise
when it sees the truth that is always and without change,
and, joined by a divine love, inheres in the truth immovably,*
and if all that exists in any manner exists by the power of
that essence which exists in the highest and most sublime
degree, then, also, the mind, insofar as it exists, either de-
rives its being from that essence, or it exists through itself.
Now, if it exists through itself, it never abandons itself, because
it is its own cause of existence, and it never perishes, as we
have shown above. If, however, it derives its being from that
essence, we must carefully investigate what could be so
contrary to it as to take away from the mind that being-mind
which is accorded by that essence.

What, then, is this contrary? Perhaps falsity, since that
essence is truth? It is clear, and beyond any doubt how much
falsity can harm the mind. Can it do more than deceive?
But, only a living person is deceived. Hence, falsity cannot
destroy the mind.

If, then, falsity, which is contrary to truth, cannot deprive
mind of being-mind, the gift of truth (for that is the way
of invincible truth), what else could be found capable of
taking away from mind being-mind? Truly, nothing; for
nothing is more powerful than its contrary [the truth] to take
that away which derives its existence from this contrary [the
truth].

Chapter 12

(19) If we are thus searching for that which is contrary
to the truth, not in so far as it is truth, but in so far as it exists
in the highest and most perfect degree—although this very
being exists to the extent of its truth; because we say that

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

truth is that by which all things are true as far as they
exist: and they exist only as far as they are true—in no
way, then, should I like to pass over the point which rather
clearly supports my position.

Since no being, in so far as it is a being, has a contrary,
how far less has that first being, called the truth, a contrary
in so far as it is a being.*

"The first statement is true. For, all being is a being only
Íor the reason that it is. Being, however, has, its only con-
trary, non-being:* wherefore, nothing is the contrary of being.
In no manner, therefore, can anything be contrary to that
substance that is in the highest degree and from the very
beginning. Hence, if the mind has its very being from this
being—the mind must have it from another source, since it
has it not from itself except from that being more excellent
than the mind—then there is nothing through which it loses
it, because no thing is contrary to the thing through which
the mind has its being. Therefore, it cannot perish.

Of course, the mind can possess wisdom in turning toward
the source of its being, and can lose it by turning away from
it. Now, turning away is the contrary to turning toward. But,
the mind cannot lose that which it has from that source to
which no thing is contrary. Therefore, the mind cannot perish.

SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 13

(20) Here, perhaps, the important question arises:
Whether the mind, though it does not perish, may not be
transformed into a substance of lower degree. The thought
may occur to someone and not without justification, that
this is effected by the following reasoning, that the mind will
never arrive at nothing, yet it could, perhaps, be changed into
a body. For, if that which was first mind became a body,
it will not altogether not be.

This [transformation] is impossible however, unless either
the mind itself wills it, or it be forced by another; yet, mind
can never be a body, either by reason of its own will or that
of force. The statement above implies that the mind, if it
becomes body, does so either by its own desire or by force,
but it does not imply that it becomes body either by its
own desire or by force. Never, however, will the mind have
such a desire.

For, all the desire the mind has toward the body is either to
possess it, or to vivify it, or to build it up somehow, or in some
form to advise it. None of these is possible, unless the mind
is better than the body. Of course, if the mind becomes
body, it will not be better than the body. Thus, the mind
will not desire to be body. There is no better proof for this
conclusion that when the mind investigates itself regarding
this point. In such manner, the mind readily discovers that
its only desire is to act, to know, to feel something, or just to
live, as far as it has power over the body.

(21) But, if the mind is forced to be body, by what, after
all, is it forced? Certainly, from something more powerful.
Hence, it cannot be forced by the body itself. For, in no way
is any body more powerful than any mind. But, a more
THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

powerful mind exercises force only upon something subject
to its authority. In no wise is a mind under the authority
of another, except by its own desires. That mind, therefore,
exercises force only to the extent to which the desires of the
other, that is forced, permit.

It has been stated, however, that the mind does not desire
to be body. It is further evident that the mind does not arrive
at the full enjoyment of its desire by losing all desires, and it
would lose them by becoming a body. The mind cannot be
forced to become a body by some other mind, which has no
right to force it, except through the desires of the subjugated
mind.’ Furthermore, the mind that has authority over another
mind necessarily prefers to have authority over a mind than
over a body, in order either to give it good advice or to rule
it with malice. Therefore, the mind will not desire to be a
body.

(22) Finally, this mind which exercises force is either
a body invested with life or is without a body.* If it is with-
out a body, it is not in this world. And if this is so, it is the
supremely Good and cannot wish such an ignominious trans-
formation for another mind.

But, if it is a body invested with life, then the other upon
which it exercises force is either something invested with life
or it is not. In the latter case it cannot be forced to anything
by another. For, no one is more powerful than the one who
exists in the highest degree. Again, the mind is in the body;
it is forced to whatever it is forced by something in the body.
Who, after all, doubts that the mind in no way can undergo
such a great change through a body?

This would be possible if the body were to be more power
-ful than the mind. Whatever that may be to which the mind
is forced through the body, it certainly is not forced through
[its own] body, but through its own desires, as has been al-
ready explained sufficiently.

However, more excellent than the rational soul—as all
agree—is God. Yet, He surely takes care of the soul, and thus
the soul cannot be forced by Him to be changed into a body.

Chapter 14

(23) Τῇ the mind, therefore, neither through its own will
nor through an outside force, suffers such a transformation,
from what source, then, can it suffer it? Should one perhaps
fear, because sleep, frequently against our will, overpowers
us, that the mind, through such a defect, be changed into a
body—as though our mind in any part whatever would be-
come weaker simply because our members become languid
through sleep. But what the mind does not feel are only
material objects, since sleep, whatever its cause may be,
derives from the body and is working within the body.

Sleep somehow deprives the senses of feeling and in some
way closes them off, so that the soul gladly yields to such a
change of the body. This change is quite natural, since it
restores the body from the strain of labor, yet this change does
not deprive the mind either of the power of feeling or of
understanding. Hence, the mind has the images of sensible
things present with such an exact similarity that, at that
very time [of sleep], they cannot be distinguished from the
objects of which they are images, and, if the mind conceives
something, it is equally true for it whether it sleeps or is
awake.

If, for instance, someone during a dream has appeared
to himself to be engaged in a discussion and, pursuing true
THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

principles, has learned something in this discussion, then
these true principles also remain the same and unchange-
able after his awakening. Yet, other circumstances may be
found untrue, such as the place of the discussion, or the
person with whom he seemed to have the discussion, and—
as far as their sound is concerned—even the words seemingly
used in the discussion, and other things of such kind as are
to be: perceived, or acted upon, through the senses by
awakened persons. Yet, these things pass away and in no way
reach the level of everlasting presence of true principles.
From this, one may conclude that, through a bodily change
such as sleep, the soul’s use of the same body can be reduced,
but not the soul’s proper life.

Chapter 15

(24) Finally, united with the body (and this not in
space, although the body occupies space) the soul is affected"
prior to the body by those highest and eternal principles,
changeless and not contained in space, and not only prior,
but also to a greater extent. For, the prior affect in the soul
occurs to the extent that the soul is nearer to these principles,
and, by the same token, the soul is more greatly affected in
proportion to the superiority over the body. This nearness
is not one in space, but in the order of nature. In this order,
then, it is understood that a form is given by the highest Being
through the soul to the body—the form whereby the latter
exists, in so far as it exists.

Hence, the body subsists through the soul and exists by
the very fact that it is animated, whether universally, as is
the world,” or individually, as is each and everything that has
life within the world.

This yields the conclusion that the soul, through the soul,
could become a body, and that this would be possible in no
other way at all. Because this does not happen—as the soul
remains soul in that through which it is soul, and the body
subsists through the soul, which gives, but does not take
away, its form—the soul cannot be changed into a body.

For, if the soul does not give the form which in turn it
receives from the supreme Good, the body is not formed by
it, and, if the body is not formed by it, it is either not formed
at all, or it assumes a form as close[to the supreme Good] as
the soul. However, the body is formed, and, if it would assume
a form as close [to the supreme Good as the soul], it would be
like the soul. But the important point here is: The soul is the
more excellent the closer [to the supreme Good] the form
is which it assumes. But, the body also would have assumed
a form close [to the Highest] if it had not received its form
from the soul. For, if there were not an intermediate cause,

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

the body would have assumed a form quite as close as the
soul,

There is nothing between the supreme Life, which is im-
mutable Wisdom and Truth, and that which is brought to
life as the last one, i.e., the body, except the vivifying soul.*
If the soul gives a form to the body so that the latter is body
in so far as it exists, it does not, through this transfer, take
away the form; however, by a transformation of the soul
into a body the soul would lose its form.

Hence, the soul does not become body: neither by itself,
because the body is only made by the soul when the soul re-
mains soul; nor by another soul, because the body is made
by the soul only through transfer of a form, and only by
privation of its form would the soul be converted into body,
if it were converted.

Chapter 16

(25) This can be said, also, of the irrational soul or life,
that the rational soul cannot be converted into the irrational.
If the irrational soul itself were not subjected to the rational
by reason of its inferior rank, it would assume a form in an
equal way and be like the latter. In natural order, the more
powerful beings transmit to the lower ones the form which
they have received from the supreme Beauty. And, surely,
if they give, they do not take away. The things of inferior
rank, in so far as they are, are for the very reason that the
more powerful beings transmit to them the form by which
they are; these are by reason of their power more excellent.
To these natures it is given that they have greater power,
not for the reason that they are heavier than those of lighter
weight, but for the reason that without large extension in’

SAINT AUGUSTINE

space they are more powerful because of the very form that
makes them more excellent. In this way the soul is more
powerful and excellent than the body. Hence, since the
body subsists by the soul, as has been said, the soul itself can
in no way be transformed into a body. For no body is made
unless it receives its form from the soul. Again, in order that
the soul become a body, it could do so only by losing, but
not by receiving a form; this is impossible for the reason that
the soul is not contained in space and is not united in space
with the body. For, if this could be so, perhaps a larger mass
could through a form turn the soul, in spite of the βου 8
higher rank, into its own of lower rank—as with the larger
air and the smaller fire. But, that is not so. Each mass that
occupies space is not in its entirety in each of its single parts,
but only in all taken together. Hence, one part is in one
place; another in another.

The soul, however, is present at the same time and entire,
not only in the entire mass of its body, but also in each of its
individual parts.’ For, it is the entire soul that feels the pain
of a part of the body, yet it does not feel it in the entire body.
When, for instance, there is an ache in the foot, the eye looks
at it, the mouth speaks of it, and the hand reaches for it.
This, of course, would be impossible, if what of the soul is
in these parts did not also experience a sensation in the foot;
if the soul were not present, it would be unable to feel what
has happened there. For, it would be incredible of a mes-

THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL 

senger to announce a fact, the occurrence of which he had
not experienced. The sensation which occurs does not run
through the mass of the body by continuation in such fashion
as not to remain unnoticed by other parts of the soul which
are elsewhere, but the entire soul feels what is going on in
the particular part of the foot and feels it only there where
it occurs. Hence, the entire soul is present, at one and the
same time, in the single parts, and it experiences sensation as
a whole, at one and the same time, in the single parts.

And yet, it is not present as a whole in such a manner as
the whiteness or any other quality of this kind is present as
a whole in each single part of the body. For, what the body,
through a change of this whiteness, experiences in one part
cannot be extended to the whiteness in the other part. Hence
the result that, since the parts of the mass are distant from
each other [in space], the mass itself is distant from itself.
That this, however, does not apply to the soul is proved by
the sense experience [in the foot] mentioned above.

CONTENTS

Chapter Page
1. Envodius proposes six gestions about the soul. Its origin. 59
2. The soul’s nature . . . . . . . . . . ν 61
3. The soul's magnitude . . . . .62
4. Although lacking dimensions, the soul i isa ; reality εν 68
5. The extraordinary power of the soul . . . . . . 66
6. The meaning of length . . . . . 69
7. For most men authority is a shorter and safer method of

arriving at truth than reason... . . . . .7l
8. The symmetry of triangles . . . . . . . . .72
9. The symmetry of squares... Ὁ. . . . .74

10. Comparison of triangles and squares . . . . . .76

1l. The most symmetrical figure . . . . . . . . 78

12. The dominating role of the point . . . . 80

13. Understanding incorporeal realities, the soul is itself

incorporeal — . MEME

14. The power of the soul ΝΞ εν νος 84

15. Growth of body seems to imply growth of soul ἢ in size. 87

16. The soul grows without any physical increment . . . 88

17. The soul is said to grow in a metaphorical sense . . . 90

18. The power of speech which a child gradually acquires
does not prove that the soul grows in size .92

19. The soul's growth depends upon the increase of its
knowledge . . . . ME:

20. The soul’s knowledge .. . . . 97

21. Increase of physical strength does not prove the soul’s
growth in size Ss

22. What makes physical strength » 2 5. ss. 99

57
Chapter Page
23. Although the soul feels throughout the body, it is not

extended with the body. Sensation. Vision . . . . 104
24. Definition of sensation explained . . . . . . .109
25. How any definition is to be tested . . . . . .112
26. Do brute animals possess knowledge and reason? — . 116
27. Reason and reasoning . 5. .18
28. Brute animals have sense knowledge but 1 not intellectual

knowledge —. . . 121
29. The difference between 5 sense knowledge and ‘intellectual

knowledge .
30. The soul is not extended quantitatively throughout the

ody .
31. Do the living segments of a worm prove that the ‘soul

is extended quantitatively throughout the body? . . 128
32. The soul is not extended quantitatively . . . . . 132
33. The seven degrees of the soul’s magnitude . . . . 136
34. Only God is to be worshipped by the soul. . . . 144
35. How the seven degrees can be variously named . . . 146
36. The harmony in allcreation . . . . . . . .M7

58
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL

Chapter 1

Fivovius. I see that you have plenty of time on your
hands; please tell me how you would answer some
questions of mine which, I believe, are not foolish
or out of order. For, more than once when I brought some
problems for you to solve, you decided to put me off by
quoting some Greek proverb or other which forbids us to
pursue that which is over our heads. But, in my problem, I
am sure, I am not reaching beyond myself. And so, if I ask
you about the soul, I hope that you will not reply: ‘What
have we to do with what is above us? Rather, [you may
conclude that] I may deserve to learn what we are in
ourselves.

AUGUSTINE. State briefly what you want to hear about the
soul.

E. I will do so, for I have mulled over this so much
that I have the points at my fingertips. My questions are: (1)
What is the origin of the soul? (2) What is its nature? (3)
What is its magnitude? (4) What is the reason for its union
with the body? (5) What is the effect of this union? (6) What
is the effect of its separation from the body?

(2) A. Your question about the origin of the soul brings
to my mind two interpretations. It is one thing to sav: Whence
is man? If what we want to know is the land of his birth.
It is quite another thing to ask: What is he composed of, that

59
60 SAINT AUGUSTINE

is, of what elements and realities is he made? Which of
these do you expect to hear mentioned, when you ask: What
is the origin of the soul? Do you want to know the district,
if I may express it that way, or the country from which it came,
or are you asking about its very substance?

E. As a matter of fact, I should like to know about both
of these, but I prefer to leave it to you to decide which of the
two I am to hear about first.

A. I believe that God, its Creator, is, so to speak, the soul's
proper habitation and its home. As for its substance, I really
cannot find a name. I certainly do not think that it belongs
to those ordinary and familiar things of which we are aware
through our senses. I do not think that the soul is composed
either of earth or water or air or fire, or of all of these
together, or of any combination of them. Now, if you were
to ask me: What is a tree composed of?—I should mention
those four well-known elements! of which such things are
supposed to consist. But, if you go on to ask: What does
earth consist of or water or fire or air?—I should have no
answer to make. In the same way, when you ask: What does
man consist of?—I can reply: Of body and soul. If you were
to ask further about the body, I shall fall back on those same
four elements. However, since your question is about the soul,
which appears to be simple and with a substance of its own,
I am just as puzzled as though you were asking the previous
question: What is earth composed of?

E. But I do not understand why you want to say that the
soul has a substance of its own, since you said it was created
by God.

1 The Greek ‘Physicists’ of the Fifth Century B. C. taught that the
universe is composed of four material principles, earth, air, fire and
water. Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics 1 iii. Át the time of Augustine this
doctrine was still in vogue; cf, De genesi ad litteram 2.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 61

A, Just as I cannot deny that earth was made by God and
still I cannot say of what other elements, so to speak, earth is
composed; for earth lacks parts in so far is it is earth,’ and
for that reason is said to be an element of all those bodies that
are formed from the four elements. Therefore, there is no
contradiction in my statement that the soul is made by God
and has its own proper nature. God Himself is the author of
the soul’s peculiar nature, just as He is the maker of fire,
air, water, and earth—the elements that make up all other
things,

Chapter 2

(3) E. For the present I accept your explanation that
the soul comes from God. I shall think it over carefully and,
if I have any difficulty, I shall bring it up later. Now, please
explain the nature of the soul.

A, It seems to me that the soul is like to God. For your
question is about the human soul, if I mistake not.

E. That is exactly what I should like you to explain:
how the human soul is like to God. For, although we believe
that God has been made by no one, you said previously that
the soul is made by God Himself.

A. Do you really think it difficult for God to make some-
thing like Himself, when you see from the great variety of
images that such power has been granted even to us?

E. But, it seems that our creations some day come to an
end, whereas God made the soul immortal, as I believe,
unless, possibly, you have a different view.

A. Do you mean, therefore, that man’s creations should
have the same quality as those of God?

2 As a primary element of bodies, earth, in the doctrine mentioned
above, was regarded as not having parts.
62 SAINT AUGUSTINE

E. Certainly I should not say that. But just as He, being
immortal, makes something immortal in His own likeness,
so we, being immortal, having been made so by God, in
making something in our own likeness ought to make some-
thing immortal also.

A. You would be correct if you could paint a picture in
the likeness of what you believe is immortal in you, but now
your painting discloses the likeness of the body, which is
certainly mortal.

E. How, then, am I like to God, when I cannot make any-
thing immortal, as He can?

A. Just as it is impossible for an image of your body to
do what your body can, so it should be no cause for wonder
that your soul has not the same power as He in whose
likeness it has been made .

Chapter 3

(4) E. Your explanation of that point is enough for the
present. Now tell me. What is the magnitude of the soul?

A. What do you mean by magnitude? For I do not under-
stand whether you are asking about the extent, as it were,
of its width, or length, or strength, or of all these taken
together, or whether you desire to know what the soul can do.
For, we are wont to inquire: How great is Hercules?—mean-
ing, How many feet tall is he? And again: How great a hero
is he?—meaning, What is his valor or prowess?

E. I desire to know how great is the soul in both senses
of the word.

A. The first sense of greatness cannot be mentioned, cannot
even be thought of, in connection with the soul. The soul must
not be regarded in any way as either long, or wide, or strong.
Such qualities, in my opinion, are attributes of bodies; thus
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 63

we are merely applying to the soul our ideas about bodies.
The liturgy’ of the Church has, therefore, a wise precept
that whoever would restore himself to the condition of man as
created by God, namely, to the likeness of God, must despise
all corporeal things and renounce the entire world, which we
see is corporeal, for that is the only way of accomplishing the
soul’s salvation, or of renovation, or reconciliation with its
Maker. And so, to your query: How great is the soul?—I am
unable to give an answer. However, I can say this, that it is
not long, or wide, or strong, or any of those things that one
usually looks for in measuring bodies. And I shall give you
the reason for my view, if you like.

E. Of course I do, and I am all ears to hear it. For, if the
soul is none of these things, it seems to me to be, as it were,
nothing.

A. First of all, if you agree, I shall show you that there
are many things which you cannot say are nothing; yet in
them you cannot find anything like the measurements that
you are looking for in the soul. And, far from concluding
that the soul is nothing because you cannot find length in it
or any such thing, you should rather deem it all the more
precious precisely because it has none of these things. In
the second place, we shall see whether it actually has any
dimensions.

E. Use whatever order and method you wish. I am all
prepared to listen and to learn.

Chapter 4
(5) A. That is fine! But I should like you to answer
this question, for possibly you already know what I am trying
1 There seems to be reference here to the instructions the catechumens

received before being baptised, perhaps to the Lenten Scrutinies
at which Augustine had been present in Milan during the Lent of 387.
64 SAINT AUGUSTINE

to teach you. You do not doubt, I am sure, that this tree is
not absolutely nothing?

E. Of course not. No one doubts that.

A. You do not doubt, do you, that justice is much more
excellent than this tree?

E. That surely is an absurd supposition—as if there were
any comparison at all!

A. You are very gracious. But now to this point. Since it
is evident that this tree is of so little value in comparison
with justice that in your opinion there is hardly any ground
for comparison, and since you admit that this wood is certainly
something, would you support the belief that justice itself
is nothing?

E. Only a fool would believe that!

A. You are certainly right. But, perhaps you think that this
tree is a reality because it is tall in its own way, and wide, and
strong, and that if you should take away these properties, it
will be nothing.

E. So it seems.

A. But, what about justice? You have admitted that it is
a reality, that it is more divine and more noble, in fact, than
this tree. Does it seem to you, then, to have length?

E. Not at all. Justice is neither long, nor wide, nor anything
I can think of like that.

A. If justice, therefore, is not any of these things, and yet
is not nothing, why do you think that the soul is nothing,
if it has no length?

E. Well, now I see that it does not follow that the soul is
nothing, if it is neither long, nor wide, nor strong. But, you
know that you have not yet stated whether it really is some-
thing. It can happen that many things which lack these
dimensions are to be reckoned of great value, but I do not
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 65

think it is immediately evident from your argument that the
soul belongs to this category.

(6) A. I know that we still have to unravel that question,
and I promised that I would explain it later on. But, because
the question is very difficult and requires deeper insight than
one is accustomed to use in the ordinary affairs of daily life,
I warn you to be alert in following the thread of our argu-
ment, and neither to be vexed at the weariness you will feel
in making the required steps, nor put out at the slow pace at
which you will finally arrive at the conclusion you desire to
reach. My first question is: Do you think that there is any
body that does not have. some length and depth and height,
according to its size?

E. I don’t understand what you mean by height.

A. I mean the dimension which makes it possible for the
interior of a body to be an object of thought, or, if the body
is transparent as glass, the object of sense perception. In my
opinion, at least, if you take this dimension away, bodies can
neither be perceived by the senses nor be thought of at all
as bodies. On this point I want you to open up your mind
to me.

E. Undoubtedly my view is that it is impossible for bodies
to be without these three dimensions.

A. What is that? Can you think of these three dimensions
existing anywhere except in bodies?

E. I do not see how they can be elsewhere .

A. "Therefore, you think that the soul is simply a body?

E. If we admit that even the wind is a body, I cannot deny
that the soul seems to be a body, for I think it is something
like the wind.

A. The wind, I grant, is as much a body as a current of
air, if you were to ask me about that. For we perceive that
66 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the wind is merely this air in a state of agitation. The truth
of this can be confirmed in a quiet place, sheltered from all
winds, where, by waving away flies with a small fan, we move
the air and feel its breath. Now, when the motion of the air
is caused by the less evident movement of heavenly or earthly
bodies through the great space of the universe, it is called the
wind and gets a different name according to the different
corners of the sky from which it comes. Or, don’t you think so?

E. Yes; and I take as likely what you say. However, I did
not say that the soul is the wind, but something like it.

A. Tell me, first of all, do you think this wind, about which
you are talking, has any length or breadth or height? Then we
shall see whether the soul is some such thing and we can
investigate, also, how great it is.

E. What can be easily found to have greater length or
width or height than the air which in a state of agitation
is the wind, as you have just convinced me?

Chapter 5

(7) A. You are right. Now, you do not think your soul
exists anywhere except in your body, do you?

E. No, I don't.

A. Is the soul inside the body only, like the contents of a
bottle, so to say, or only on the outside, like a covering, or
do you think it is both inside and outside?

E. I think it is both inside and outside. For, unless it were
inside, there would be no life inside of us, and unless it were
on the outside, it could not feel a slight prick on the skin.

A. Why, then, do you question further about the magnitude
of the soul, since you see that it is as large as the spaces of
the body allow?

E. If reason teaches this, I shall seek no further.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 67

A. You are right not to go beyond what reason tells us. But
does this explanation seem to you to be very cogent?

E. Yes, since I do not find any other. I shall ask at the
proper time a question that bothers me, namely: Does the
soul’s shape remain the same when it has left the body? I
recall that I placed this last on the list of the questions to be
asked. I thought I should mention it here, because a question
about the number of souls seems to belong to a discussion of
quantity.

A, Yes, there is a connection, but first let us finish our dis-
cussion about the extension of the soul, for I am not yet
satisfied on that point, so that, in resolving your doubts, I
hope to discover some new light for myself.

E. Ask as you wish. For, your pretended doubt now makes
me really question what I had presumed was already settled.

(8) A. Tell me, please, does not what we call memory
seem to you to be a mere word?

E. No one would say that.

A. Does memory, in your opinion, belong to the soul or the
body?

E. It would be absurd to doubt about that. Can we believe
or imagine that a lifeless body remembers?

A. Do you still remember the city of Milan?

E. Very much so.

A. Now that mention has been made of it, do you recall its
size and character?

E. Yes I do, and nothing more vividly and completely.

A. Now, although you do not behold it with your eyes,
you see it in your mind.

E. That is so.

A, You also remember, I believe, how distant it is from us
at this moment.
68 SAINT AUGUSTINE

E. Yes, I recall also that.

A. Therefore, you also see in your mind the intervening
space.

E. Yes, I do.

A, Since your soul is here where your body is, and does not
extend beyond the space of the body, as the previous proof
made clear, how is it that it sees all these things?

E. It is done through memory, I believe; not because the
soul is present to those places.

A. The impressions of those places, then, are stored in the
memory.

E. I think so, for I have no idea what is going on in those
places at this moment. Certainly I would be aware of it, if
my mind actually reached those places and perceived what is
being done there now.

A. What you say seems to me to be true. But certainly,
these impressions are of bodies.

(9) E. Necessarily so, for cities and climes are nothing else
than bodies.

A. Have you ever looked into a tiny mirror or have you
ever seen your face reflected in the pupil of another person's
eye?

E. Often indeed.

A. Why does the face appear smaller than it really is?

E. How could you wish anything different than that the
image be in keeping with the size of the mirror?

A. The images of bodies must be small, therefore, if the
bodies in which they are reflected are small.

E. Necessarily so.

A. Why, then, since the soul is in so small a space as its
body, can so great images be reflected in it, as cities, and the
width of the earth, and any other immense object that can
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 69

be imagined? I wish you to consider somewhat more carefully
how great and how many objects our memory contains; all
of these, of course, are contained in the soul. How great
therefore, the depth, the width, the immensity of the soul
that can hold all these things, although our previous proof
seems to show that the soul is only as great as the body.

E. I cannot find anything to reply, nor can I explain enough
how much I am disturbed. And I laugh at myself for having
been taken in so quickly by my earlier argument that I
should want to confine the magnitude of the soul within the
boundaries of the body.

A. Does the soul seem to you now to be some such thing
as the wind?

E. Not at all. For, even if this air, whose flow in all
probability is believed to be the wind, could fill this entire
world, the soul can picture to itself worlds as great as this
without number, and in what space the soul would keep all
these images is beyond my power to surmise.

A. See, then, how much better it is to believe, as I said
earlier, that the soul is neither long, nor wide, nor high, as
you admitted regarding justice.

E. I should easily agree if I were not more at a loss than
before how the soul, without any length, or width, or height
of its own, can hold images without number of such great
spaces.

Chapter 6

(10) A. A careful discussion of these three topics—
length, width and height—may possibly furnish a solution to
your difficulty, so far as a solution may be found. Make an
effort, therefore, to think of length which has not yet taken
on any width.

E. I cannot think of anything like that. A spider's thread
70 SAINT AUGUSTINE

is one of the most tenuous things we are wont to see, and yet,
if I place that before my mind’s eye, the length is there per se,
and also width and height. No matter how slight these last
two are, at least I cannot deny their existence.

A. Your answer is not entirely absurd; surely, when you
think of these three dimensions in a spider's thread, you see
them clearly and you know that one is not the other.

E. How could I help knowing that there is a difference;
for how else could I see that not one of them is wanting to this
thread?

A. As your mind grasped the distinction between them, so,
too, it has the power to think of length alone, apart from the
other two dimensions, provided you do not imagine a partic-
ular body. For, no matter what shape this may be, it will not
be without these three dimensions. Now, it is an incorporeal
reality that I wish you to understand. Indeed, length alone
cannot be found in a body; it can be understood only by the
mind.

E. Now I see what you mean.

A. As for this length, then, you see surely that it allows no
cutting lengthwise, even in thought; if it did, it would also
have width.

E. That is evident.

A. This length, then, pure and simple, if you will, we shall
call a line. That is the name many learned men give it.

E. Call it what you please. I am not one to bother about
names when the reality itself is clear.

(11) A. You do well. Not only do I approve, but I
counsel you always to make it your delight to have more care
for reality than for words. But this line, which I think you
now understand correctly, if it is extended from one end or
from both ends as far as possible, will have no end, as you see.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 71

Or is it too much for the keenness of your mind to see that?
E. I see it clearly and without any trouble.
A. You see, then, that a figure will never be formed simply
by prolonging that line.
E. I do not understand what you mean by figure.

Chapter 7

A. For the present I call a figure that in which any space
is enclosed by a line or lines. For example, suppose you are to
draw a circle or four lines meeting at their extremes; you
would draw in such a way that the end of one line would not
fail to unite with the end of the other line.

Θ᾽

E. Now I think I know what you mean by a figure. But I
wish I could see as well the drift of all this and how you will
use this to let me know what I seek about the soul.

(12) A. At the start I warned you about this and I
asked you to be patient with our roundabout method. And
now I repeat the request. Our search is not for a trifle. Its
object is not readily discerned, for we want to know this sub-
ject distinctly and hold on to it, if possible. To trust the word
of another is one thing; to trust our own reason is a different
thing; to take something on authority is a great timesaver
and involves no toil. If this way has any attraction for you,
you may read in the extensive writings of great and good
men what they thought should be said about these subjects as
a safe and easy guide for the unlearned; and these men aimed
at securing the confidence of persons whose minds, being either

72 SAINT AUGUSTINE

too slow or too occupied, could find no other safe road to
truth. Such persons, whose number is very great, if they wish
to grasp the truth by reason, are easily taken in by sophisms
that land them in the swamp of error from which they never
or only with difficulty succeed in emerging and extricating
themselves. For these, then, it is a decided advantage to trust
a most reliable authority and to shape their conduct according
to it. If you think that such a way is safer, I shall not only
offer no resistance, but shall thoroughly approve. But, if you
cannot bridle your eager conviction of coming to the truth
by reason, you must be prepared for long, hard, and circuitous
riding, pursuing the path where reason beckons—that reason
alone which is worthy of the name, that is, right reason. Not
only is it right, but it is also sure and free from every semblance
of falsehood, if man can ever attain to that state where no
false argument or specious pretext can make him betray the
truth.

E. I shall desire nothing more eagerly. Let reason guide and
lead me where it will; only let it bring me to the goal.

Chapter 8

(13) A. God will do this, and we should implore His help
exclusively—especially, at least in such matters. But let us
return to the discussion I began. Since you know what a line
is and what a figure is, my question is this: Can any figure
be made if a line should be extended from either end or from
one end to infinity?

E. Certainly not.

A. What, then, must one do to make a figure?

E. Make the line finite, and extend it in the form of a circle
until both ends meet. I do not see any other method of
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 73

enclosing a space with one line. This is the only way of making
a figure according to your definition.

A. Suppose I want to make a figure with straight lines. Can
this be done with one line?

Ε. Not at all.

4. With two?

E. Not with two, either.

A. With three?

E. Yes, you can.

4. Very good. You perceive clearly and hold that, to
make a figure with straight lines, you cannot do it with less
than three. If any reasoning process opposed this, would it
change you from your opinion?

E. Really, if anyone should prove to me that this is false,
I would lose all confidence in my ability to know anything.

A. Well, then, tell me how you make a figure with three
lines.

By joining their ends one to the other.

Is not an angle made at the joining?

"That is right.

How many angles in this figure?

As many as there are lines.

Are the lines equal or unequal?

Equal.

. Are the angles all equal or is one more acute or more
obtuse than the other?

E. The angles are also equal.

A. In a figure whose three sides are equal, are the angles
necessarily equal also?

Δ A

SES SES)
74 SAINT AUGUSTINE

E. They must be equal.

A. Now, suppose that the three sides of the figure are
unequal, is there any possibility of the angles being equal?

E. None whatever.

A, Correct. Now, another question. Which figure has the
more beautiful and striking proportions—the one whose sides
are equal or unequal?

E. Undoubtedly the one that excels in equality is more
perfect.

Chapter 9

(14) A. So you prefer equality to the lack of it.

E. Certainly, like everyone else.

A, Now notice, in the figure whose three angles are equal,
which part is opposite an angle, a line or an angle?

E. A line, as I see it.

A. Now, suppose you have a figure in which an angle is
opposite an angle, and a side opposite a side, would you not
admit that such a figure has more equality?

E. I grant you that, but I do not see how you can make
such a figure out of three lines.

A. Out of four, then?

E. Yes, out of four.

A. Then a better figure results from four equal lines than
from three?

E. I would say so, since it has greater equality.

A. Another point. Can a figure of four equal lines be made
in such a way that the angles are not all equal?

THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 75

E. I think it is possible.

4. How?

E. By widening two angles and by closing up the other two.

4. Do you notice that the wider angles face each other and
the same is true of the smaller ones?

E. That is absolutely true.

A. You notice that here, too, equality obtains as far as pos-
sible. Once you make a figure of four equal lines, either all
four angles are exactly equal or at least are equal in pairs,
and the pairs are opposite each other.

E. I notice that and hold it as correct.

(15) A. Does it not strike you that these figures in their
own way reveal unmistakably a kind of unfailing justice?

E. What do you mean?

A. Because we say, I believe, that justice is equity, and
equity seems to be derived from equality. Now, the virtue of
equity certainly requires that each man be given what is his.
This ‘to each his own’ implies a definite distinction of persons.
Do you not think so?

E. That is evident and I agree entirely.

A. Do you think there is any distinction, if all things are
equal without'any difference whatever between them?

E. None whatever.

A. Therefore, justice cannot be maintained unless there is
some inequality, if I may use the word, in the things in which
it[justice] is maintained, and some unlikeness.

E. I understand.

A, Since, therefore, we admit a dissimilarity between those
figures under discussion, for, although both are composed of
equal sides, yet one has three and the other four angles—do
you not perceive a certain closeness to justice in this: that the
figure which cannot admit equality of opposite parts maintains
76 SAINT AUGUSTINE

invariably an equality of angles, while in the other figure,
which has complete equality of opposites, the law of angles
permits inequality up to a point? Since I was excited over this
fact, I cannot help but put the question to you whether this
truth, this equity, this equality, would be a source of any
delight to you.

E. I see now what you mean and I am indeed filled with
wonder.

A. Another point. You have good reason to prefer equality
to inequality; in fact, I think there is no human being who
would not make the same choice. Well, then, let us look for
the figure, if you will, that has the greatest equality. For,
whatever it be, we shall certainly prefer it to all others.

E. Let us do so; I desire to know what it is.

Chapter 10
(16) A. My first question: Of those two figures about

which we have surely talked enough, does that one seem to
you to excel which is composed of four equal sides and of as
many equal angles? As you notice, it has equality both of sides
and of angles. While we could not find this equality in the
figure that is enclosed by three equal sides, yet this figure
has an equality of opposites, for a side is opposite an angle
and an angle opposite a side.

E. It is just as you say.

A. Has this figure, then, the greatest equality, or do you
think differently? If it has, it will be superfluous to continue

THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 77

our search; if it has not, I should like you to prove it to me.

E. I think it has, for I cannot detect any inequality where
the lines and the angles are both equal.

A. I disagree, for a straight line has the greatest equality
until it comes to angles. But when it joins another line from
the opposite side and makes an angle, do you not see that this
is something unequal? Does that part of the figure which is
closed by a side seem to you to coincide in equality or in like-
ness with that part which is enclosed by an angle?

E. In no way. I am ashamed of my hasty answer. I was
led astray by the equality I observed between the sides and
between the angles themselves. It is quite evident, however,
that the sides differ greatly from the angles.

4. Take another clear proof of inequality. You surely
notice that there is a center point in each of these two figures,
namely, the triangle with equal sides and the square.

E. I see that plainly.

A. Now, when we draw lines from this same center to the
sides of the figures, will the lines drawn be all equal or

unequal?

E. Unequal, of course, for the lines we draw to the angles
will necessarily be somewhat longer.

A. How many in the square; how many in the triangle?

E. Four here, and three there.

A. Again, of all the lines, which are the shortest and
how many are there in each figure?

E. The same, namely, those drawn to the middle of the sides.

A. Your answers are perfectly correct and there is no

78 SAINT AUGUSTINE

need of our dwelling on this point. It is enough for our purpose
to see that, while great equality obtains in these figures, it is
not yet perfect in every respect.

E. I see that clearly and what that figure is that has the
greatest equality I am very anxious to know.

Chapter 11

(17) A. What else can it be, do you think, except the
figure whose boundary is everywhere consistent, with no angle
breaking up its equality and from whose center equal lines
can be drawn to every part of the boundary.

E. Now I believe I understand, for I think you are
describing the figure which is enclosed by one line drawn in
a circle.

A. You understand rightly Now, then, consider this.
Since the previous reasoning has shown that a line is under-
stood only in length, and assumes no width, and, therefore,
cannot be divided lengthwise in the direction of its extent, do
you think that any figure can be found without width?

E. None.

A. Is there any possibility of width being without length,
even though it be width alone, in the same way as we earlier
understood length to be without width. Or is this impossible?

E. I see that it is impossible.

A. You also see, unless I am mistaken, that width can be
divided in all directions, whereas a line cannot be divided
lengthwise.

E. That is evident.

A, Which do you consider of greater value: what is divisi-
ble or indivisible?

E. What is indivisible, certainly.

A. You prefer, therefore, a line to width. For, if what is
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 79

indivisible is to be preferred, we must necessarily prefer what is
less divisible. But, width can suffer division in all directions,
whereas length can be divided only crosswise, for it does not
allow division lengthwise. It is, therefore, of greater value.
Or is your thought different?

OAH 69

E. Reason compels me to admit completely what you say.

(18) A. Let us now investigate this problem, if you will,
whether there is anything in keeping with this line of thought
that is completely indivisible. It will then be so much better
than even a line. For, you observe, a line can be divided
innumerable times crosswise. So I now pass on to you the
task of discovering this by yourself.

E. I think that what we were placing in the figure as the
center, from which lines are drawn to the boundary, is
indivisible. For, if it is divided, it certainly cannot lack length
or even width. If it has only length, it is not the starting place
from which lines are drawn, but is itself a line. And if, more-
over, it is wide, then a further center must be sought, from
which lines are drawn to the boundary of the width. But,
reason rejects both suppositions. Hence, this will be some-
thing that is indivisible.

A. Your statement is correct. But does it not seem to
you that the same holds true of the starting place of a line,
even though a figure is not yet formed for our mind to locate
its center. I say that the origin of a line where length begins
to exist is something I want you to understand as having no
length whatever. For, if you take it as having length, you fail
completely to understand that a point is where length begins.
80 SAINT AUGUSTINE

E. I agree entirely.

A. This, then, which I see you now understand, is the most
excellent of all our findings, since it completely excludes
division. It is called a point when it occupies the center of a
figure. But, if it is the beginning of a line, or even lines or
their end, or even when it marks something that must be
understood as having no parts without having become the
center of a figure, it is called a sign. A mark without parts
is a sign; a mark occupying the center of a figure is a point.
Thus, every point is also a sign, but not every sign is a point.
Mutual agreement on these terms is something I wish to
have, in order to lessen our talking around the topic under
discussion. While many would reserve the term ‘point’ for the
center not of any figure, but only of a circle or a sphere, we
need not labor too much over words.

E. I agree.

Chapter 12

A. You surely also see how many functions it has. For,
from a point a line takes its origin and in a point it ends. No
figure can be made of straight lines unless the angle is closed
by a point, and, wherever a line can be cut, it is cut through
a point, although a point itself cannot be cut. It is required
for the joining of every two lines. Finally, although reason has
shown that the circle, because of its equality, surpasses all
other plane figures (for we have said nothing yet of solids),
what else is the regulator of this symmetry than the point
placed in the center? Much can be said of the function of the
point, but I use restraint and leave further considerations
to you.

E. You are undoubtedly right. If any difficulty arises I shall
not be slow to ask. I do see fairly well, I think, the marvelous
function of this sign.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 81

(20) 4. Now, then, turn your attention to this question.
Since you clearly understand what a sign is, what length is,
and what width is, which one of these seems to have need of
another and in such a way that without the other it cannot
exist?

E. I see that width needs length; otherwise it could not be
understood. I notice further that length does not need width
for its existence, but without a sign it could not exist. The
sign, however, clearly stands by itself and needs none of these.

A. It is as you state, but consider carefully whether width
can be bisected from every side or whether, although it allows
more division than a line, it cannot allow division from one
side.

E. I do not know why it cannot.

A. I believe your memory is faulty, for you cannot be
ignorant of this. I shall remind you of it in this way. Certainly
your conception of width is such that no notion of height
intrudes into it.

E. That is entirely correct.

A. Now, to this width let height be added, and answer
me whether this addition does not increase the possibility of
further division on every side.

E. You have given me a very good hint. Now I see that
not only from above or from below, but also from the sides,
division can be made. In fact, there is no part remaining that
cannot be bisected. Hence, it is clear that one cannot cut
width on those sides where height is to be erected.

(21) A. Since, therefore, you have a true concept of
length and width and height, I ask whether you can have
height without the other two dimensions.

E. J see that you cannot have height without length, but
you can have height without width.
82 SAINT AUGUSTINE

A. Go back, then, to your conception of width. If you
imagine it to be lying flat, as it were, now turn it upright on
any side, as if you were, let us suppose, to put it through the
narrowest crack between two closed doors. Do you understand
yet what I mean?

E. I understand what you say, but not yet, perhaps, what
you mean.

A. Simply this, that you answer whether width now
placed in an upright position seems to you to have converted
itself into height and to have forfeited the name and descrip-
tion of width, or whether it still remains width, notwithstand-
ing its position.

E. I think it has become height.

A. Please recall our definition of height.*

E. I recall it now and I am ashamed of my answer. Width
raised even in this position allows no vertical division length-
wise from top to bottom. Wherefore, the concept of width
rules out any interior, although it does allow a center and
boundaries. But, in your previous demonstration about height,
it was said, I recall, that there is no height where the mind
cannot perceive something inside.

A. You are correct and I was hoping that you would recall
that. I want you to answer now whether you prefer what is
true to what is false.

E. If I had any doubt, I would be unbelievably stupid.

A. Is that a true line, then, that can be cut lengthwise?
A truc sign that can be divided in some way? A true width
which, when turned upright, allows vertical division length-
wise from top to bottom?

E. Nothing is less true.

1 See p. 65.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 83

Chapter 13

(22) A. Did you ever see with the eyes of the body a
point or a line or width as we have been describing it?

E. Never, indeed. These things are not corporeal.

A. But, if corporeal things are seen with the eyes of the
body, in accordance with certain marvelous affinity of natures,
should not the soul by which we see these incorporeal things
be itself neither a body nor in any way like a body? Or have
you a different opinion?

E. Well, I admit now that the soul is not a body or any-
thing like a body, but please tell me what it is.

A. Consider, for the present, whether we have proved
that it lacks entirely all quantity, for this is the question we are
discussing now. For, what is the soul was the earlier topic of
our discussion. That you have forgotten surprises me. You
r2member that you asked first: Whence is the soul? which,
I recall, we handled in two ways: one, in which we inquired
about its place of origin, as it were; the other, in which we con-
sidered whether it was composed of earth, or fire or any other
of these elements, or of all together, or of a combination of
some of them. And we agreed on this conclusion, that an
answer to this question is as much beyond us as the answer to
the question: Whence is earth or any other one of the
elements? For, it must be understood that, although God
made the soul, it has a definite substance which is neither
of earth, nor of fire, nor of air, nor of water, unless, per-
chance, one should think that God gave to earth a nature that
is exclusively its own and did not give to the soul a nature
that is proper to it. If you wish a definition of what the soul is,
I have a ready answer. It seems to me to be a certain kind of
substance, sharing in reason, fitted to rule the body.'

I For the significance of this definition, cf. E. Gilson, The Spirit of
Medieval Philosophy (New York 1986) 174.

84 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 14

(23) And now, focus your attention on the problem of
whether the soul has a kind of quantity and local extension,
if I may use such terms. Now, because it is not a body—
otherwise it could not understand anything incorporeal, as the
previous reasoning proved—it undoubtedly lacks space by
which bodies are measured. For this reason, it is beyond the
possibility of belief or understanding that any such quantity
should be in the soul. If you wonder why the soul, which has
no quantity, holds in its memory the great spaces of sky and
earth and sea, it is because of its amazing power, some notion
of which our previous discussions should have brought within
the focus of your mind’s eye, more or less depending on its
ability to grasp these things. For, if whatever lacks length,
width, and height is not a body, as reason has demonstrated;
if one of these dimensions cannot be in a body without the
other two; if, nevertheless, we have granted that the interior
eye of the soul, that is to say, the intelligence, has the power
to see even a mere line—then I think that our premises
warrant the conclusion that the soul is not only not a body,
but that it is superior to a body. Granting that, I think there
can be no doubt that it is superior to a line, for it is absurd to
say that what is superior to a body is not superior to the
dimensions without which a body cannot exist, namely,
length, width, and height. But, the line itself, which is inferior
to the soul, is superior to the other two dimensions, because
it allows less division than they. Moreover, the further these
two dimensions are extended in space, the more they outstrip
a line in regard to division. A line has no other extension than
that of length. Now, if you take away the only extension a line
has, namely length, nothing of extension remains. Therefore,
whatever is superior to a line is necessarily without extent and
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 85

admits no division or cutting whatever. Therefore, all for
naught is our labor in seeking after the soul’s magnitude;
there is no such thing, since the soul, we grant, is superior to a
line. And, if a circle is the best of all plane figures, and if
in a circle nothing is more excellent or more important
than a point, which beyond all doubt is without any parts—
why should anyone be astonished that the soul, which is
neither a body, nor extended in length, nor spread out in
width, nor massed in depth, has, nevertheless, such power that
it rules all the members of the body and presides over all the
motions of the body for all the world as the director of its
activity?

(24) Moreover, since the center of the eye, which is
called the pupil, is simply a certain point and, despite that,
has so much power that from a somewhat elevated spot it
can take in and survey half the sky, whose space is beyond
words to describe—why should it be so strange that the soul
should be without any bodily magnitude composed of those
three dimensions, even though it can represent any bodily
magnitude whatever? But, to few men is it allowed to discern
the soul by the soul, that is, so that the soul sees itself.’ It sees,
moreover, through the intelligence, which alone has the power
to see that nothing is more powerful and more majestic in
reality than those natures which the mind understands to be,
so to say, without bulk. The magnitude of a body is not with-
out reason called its bulk, and, if bulk is to be reckoned of
great value, then elephants would be wiser than we. If some-
one, knowing their ways, should say that elephants are wise
1 From the context the thought does not seem to be that the soul has

a direct intuition of its own nature, but, rather, that the soul must
use its 'sight' or reason, a task that is difficult for most men when
there is question of investigating the nature of the soul. In this

connection, Augustine's earlier remarks on authority and reason should
be read again.
86 SAINT AUGUSTINE

(I myself was astonished when I watched them and I have
observed that men are often in doubt about this point), at
least he will grant, I believe, that a little bee knows more than
an ass; certainly, to compare their size would be more than
ridiculous. Or, again, in connection with what we were saying
about the eye, who does not see that the eye of the eagle is
much smaller than ours. Yet, the eagle, flying so high that it
is lost to view in the clear light, can easily see a hare in a
thicket and a fish beneath the waves. But, if the size of the
body counts for nothing, as regards the power of percep-
tion in the senses themselves which can perceive only corporeal
things, is there any ground for fearing that the human soul is
nothing? Does not the soul’s far superior and almost only
sight, reason itself,? by which it strives even to find itself—
does not reason, that is, the soul itself, prove that it lacks every
kind of magnitude by which space is occupied? We must
regard the soul as great, great indeed, but not great with any
material bulk. That way of thinking comes more easily to those
who are well trained and approach these questions not from
a desire of empty glory, but from a divine love of truth;
or, though less equipped for subtle investigation, come to
seek out the answer with patience, docility, and trust in the
guidance of good men, with the determination to turn them-
selves away, as far as is permitted in this life, from the
tyranny of the senses. In divine Providence it cannot happen
that the pious, chaste, and diligent quest of religious souls for
themsélves and their God, that is, for truth, should go
unrequited.

2 For Augustine, reason is the sight of the soul; reasoning is the mov-
ing of this sight over the things that are to be seen. This distinction
is explained below on p. 119 f.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 87

Chapter 15

(25) But, let us now leave this question, unless you
have a difficulty, and go on to another. Perhaps our discussion
of those figures dragged on longer than you liked. However,
you will see how much bearing it has on other points, if
you grant that it sheds some light on the present inquiry.
Studies like this train the mind to look at rather subtle points,
lest, dazed by their light and unable to bear it, the soul seek
willing refuge in the darkness from which it desired to escape.
This study is also, as far as man is given to investigate these
matters, the source of most certain arguments for settling
doubts about established conclusions. As for myself, I have
fewer doubts about these things than about the things we
see with our eyes. To me it is an intolerable offense against
logic to admit that we excel the animals in intelligence and
that the object we see with our bodily eyes is a thing which
even some animals see better, and, at the same time, to
insist that what we see with our mind is nothing. If it were
said that the mind is of the same nature as the object of
bodily vision, no more unwarranted statement would seem
to be uttered.

(26) E. I am very happy to follow your thoughts and
I agree. Yet I wonder about this: while it is so clear to me
that the soul has no corporeal quantity that I show not the
slightest resistance to those arguments, and while I am entirely
unaware of any point which I cannot grant, why is it that,
as the body grows with age, the soul grows, too, or at least,
would seem to grow? Who would deny that small children
are not to be compared in cleverness to some animals? Who
would doubt that as they grow older their soul also seems
to grow? Then, if the soul is extended through the space of
88 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the body, why does it not have quantity? If, however, it is
not extended, how does it feel all over anything that
strikes it?

A. These points that you bring up have often caused me
to wonder, too; therefore, I have an answer ready for you
that I am wont to give myself. How good it is, your reason
will lead you to decide; yet, such as it is, it is an answer I
certainly cannot improve upon, unless perchance, God should
suggest something better to my mind during the course of
our discussion. But, let us follow our usual procedure, if you
please; that is, you reply to your own questions, as reason
suggests. First of all, let this be our point of inquiry: Whether
this is certain proof of the simultaneous growth of body and
soul that, with the approach of age, man becomes fit for
human association and becomes more and more skilled in it?

E. Let us proceed as you wish, for I like very much this
method of teaching and learning. I do not know why it is,
but, when I arrive at the answer to a question that my
ignorance led me to ask, the discovery is not only satisfying
but stimulating.

Chapter 16

(27) A. Tell me whether ‘greater’ and ‘better’ seem
to you to be two distinct things or one and the same thing
called by two different names.

E. I know that we say that one thing is greater and another
is better.

A. Which of these two do you think connotes quantity?

E. That which we say is greater.

A, When we admitted that the round figure is better than
the square, was it quantity that made the difference or
something else?
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 89

E. It was not quantity by any means; as we decided earlier,
the cause of this excellence is equality.

A. Now, then, focus your attention on this question:
Would it seem to you that virtue is a certain equality of a
life completely in harmony with reason? For, if in life con-
duct is at variance with right principles, we are more of-
fended, if I mistake not, than when some part of a circle is
more or less distant from the center than the other parts.
Or do you have a different opinion?

E. Rather, I agree entirely and I think your description
of virtue is correct. For, only that should be called or regarded
as reason which is true. Surely, only he whose whole life
corrresponds to the truth—only he, or certainly he above all
—lives well and uprightly. Only the man who is so minded
must be judged to have virtue and to live it.

A. Your statement is correct. But, surely you see that a
circle is more like virtue than any other plane figure. For
that reason we are wont to give high praise to the line of
Horace! in which he says, when describing the wise man,
‘His strength is in himself; all smooth and round, his ego is a
little world'—and with good reason. For, you will not find
in the endowments of the soul anything that is more harmo-
nious with itself in every way than virtue; nor in plane
figures anything more symmetrical than a circle. Wherefore,
if a circle not by the greatness of space, but by a certain uni-
form design, excels other figures, how much more should our
esteem of virtue be, which surpasses all the other affections
of the soul not by occupying greater space, but by conforming
to reason in a certain Godlike harmony.

(28) Now, when a child is praised for growing up, what

1 Satires 11, vii, 86.
90 SAINT AUGUSTINE

is said to be the goal of that growing, if not virtue? Is that
not so?

E. Obviously.

A. You should not think, therefore, that the soul grows
by increasing its size with age as the body does. For, by grow-
ing, the soul comes to virtue, which, we admit, derives all
its beauty and perfection not from any greatness of space,
but from the great power of consistency. And if greater is
one thing and better is another, as you already admitted,
the soul should not be called greater but better by reason of
its advancing with age and becoming subject to reason. But,
if this results from the size of the members, the taller or
stronger a man is, the more prudent he should be. That the
truth is quite different I feel you will not deny.

E. No one would deny it. Still, since you yourself admit
that the soul grows with age, I wonder how it happens that,
being without any quantity, a soul is helped by the space of
time, even though not by the size of the members.

Chapter 17

(29) A. Cease to wonder, because my answer to you
here will be along similar lines. Just as the size of the mem-
bers furnishes no basis for arguing that the soul is helped
because many men of rather slight and small build are found
to be wiser than some others who have a large frame, so,
because we see that some young men are more given to labor
and exertion than older men, I do not see why any one
should entertain the view that the passing of years adds
growth to souls in the same way as it does to bodies. Even
bodies—which admittedly are supposed to grow in time and
become larger with the years—often enough, the older they
get, the smaller they are; not only bodies of the aged, which
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 91

shrink and grow smaller with the lapse of time, but even in
the bodies of boys we observe that some, although older
in years than others, are shorter in size. If, then, the ac-
cumulation of years is not a cause of size even of bodies
themselves, but all this growth is to be attributed to the action
of the seed and of certain elements embedded in nature
which are somewhat hidden and hard to recognize, how
much less ground is there for the view that the soul becomes
longer with length of years, merely because we observe that
it has learned much from habit and long experience?

(30) If you are surprised at our usual rendering of the
Greek word makrothumian by long suffering, I beg you
to notice that we apply to the soul metaphors taken from the
body, and vice versa. For, if Virgil’ spoke of a ‘wicked’
mountain and of a most ‘fair’ land—which words, you
notice, are transferred from the soul to a body—what wonders,
then, if we reverse the process and speak of 'longanimity."
since strictly speaking only bodies can be long? Indeed, the
virtue called greatness of soul is correctly understood to
refer not to any space but to a certain strength, that is, to
a power and force in the soul, a virtue, in fact, that is the more
esteemed, the more it despises material things. But we shall
speak of this later, when we bring up the question how great
is the soul, as one is wont to ask how great was Hercules in
his mighty deeds and not in the weight of his body. For,
so we made our division above. You ought now to recall what
we have already said about the point, namely that reason
declared that it is important enough to be the main element
in all geometrical figures. Does not this importance and main
role seem to show a certain magnitude? Yet in a point we find
no dimensions? Therefore, when we hear and speak of a

1 Aeneid XII 687;

2eorgics 11 460.
92 SAINT AUGUSTINE

great and strong soul, we ought not to think of its size, but of
its power. Therefore, if we have now spent enough time on
your first argument in support of your view that the soul
seems to grow with the age of the body, we may pass to the
next.

Chapter 18

(31) E. I don't know whether we have tracked down all
the doubts that cause me real worry; perhaps some elude
my memory at present. However, one does come to mind
and let us see what there is to it; a very young child does
not speak, and yet acquires that power as it grows older.

A. That is easily answered. I believe you understand that
each one speaks the language of the people among whom
he was born and brought up.

E. Everyone knows that.

A. Suppose, then, that some one was born and brought
up among people who do not talk, but by nods and gestures
express the thoughts they have to communicate. Do you not
think that he would do the same and would not speak, since
he never heard anyone speaking?

E. Please do not ask me that, since the supposition is
absurd. How can I imagine such men or anyone being born
among them?

A. But surely, did you not see at Milan a young man οἱ
excellent physique and refined manners, yet so mute and deaf
that he understood others only by means of signs and that
only in the same way could he express what he wished? This
man is very well known. I also knew a farmer and his wife
who could speak, yet they had four sons and daughters, ar
perhaps more (I do not recall exactly how many), who
were deaf and dumb: dumb, because they couldn't speak;
deaf, because they could take in signs only through their eyes.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 93

E. I knew the first man also, but the second I did not;
yet I believe you. But what is the point?

A. You said you could not imagine anyone being born
among such people.

E. And I say the same thing now. The persons you men-
tioned were born of parents who could speak. I believe you
admitted that.

A. Yes, I did. Then, since it is clear that some such persons
can exist, I ask you to consider, if such a man and woman
should marry and should be carried off by some chance to
a place remote from civilization, but not incompatible with
human living, and if they should have a son who is not deaf,
how could he speak with his parents?

E. How do you think, except that his parents would give
him signs which he should make back to them? But a small
child would not be able to do even this. Hence, my contention
remains. Anyhow, what difference does it make whether he
acquires the ability to speak or to make signs by growing
older, since both belong to the soul which we are loath to
admit undergoes any growth.

(32) A. You seem to hold that the man who walks a
rope has a larger soul than those who cannot do this.

E. That is different, for who does not see that rope-walk-
ing is an art.

A. Why, I ask, an art? Is it because he has learned it?

E. That is right.

A. Then, if someone learns something else, do you not hold
that this is an art also?

E. Whatever is learned clearly belongs to art; this I do
not deny.

A. Did not this boy then learn to make a gesture from
his parents?
94 SAINT AUGUSTINE

E. He surely did.

A. You should attribute it to some art of mimicry, there-
fore, and not to any increase in the soul as it grew older.

E. But I cannot grant that.

A. Therefore, not everything that is learned comes under
art, as you just now admitted.

E. It does come under art.

A. Hence, he did not learn the gesture, which you like-
wise had granted .

E. He did learn it, but it does not come under art.

A. Just a little while before you said that whatever is
learned comes under art.

E. I admit that to speak and to make a gesture come under
art in so far as we have learned them. But there are some
arts which we learn while we watch others, and there are
other arts which are taught us by teachers.

A. Which kind does the soul take in by becoming larger?
Both kinds?

E. Not both; the former.

A. Do you not think that to walk a rope belongs to that
class? It would seem that it is by seeing it done that the skill
is acquired.

E. I think so; yet not every spectator who watches carefully
how it is done can acquire this skill, but only those who
submit to instruction.

A. You are correct. And I would give the same answer
about learning to speak, for many Greeks and those of other
nationalities often hear us speaking as they might watch a
rope walker, but really to learn our language they entrust
themselves to teachers, just as we do when we wish to learr.
theirs. Since such is the case, I wonder why you wish to
attribute to the soul’s growth the ability to speak, but not
the ability to walk a rope.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 95

E. I don’t know how you come to mix up these two
things. The man who entrusts himself to a teacher to learn our
language already knows his own, which I maintain he
learned through the soul's growth; when he learns a foreign
language, I attribute that to art and not to a larger soul.

A. But, if that boy who was born and bred among mutes,
later on and as a young man, by coming across other people,
should have learned to speak, when he had known no other
language, would you hold the view that at the moment he
learned to speak his soul had undergone an increase in size?

E. I would never dare to say that, and I yield to reason.
I no longer regard the ability to speak as an argument for
holding that the soul is larger, lest I be forced to admit that
the soul acquires all the other arts by growing larger; for, if I
should say that, this absurdity would follow, that the soul
shrinks whenever it forgets anything.

Chapter 19

(33) A. You reveal a good grasp of the question. To
let you hear the truth, the soul is rightly said to be enlarged,
as it were, by learning and to grow smaller by unlearning, but
in a metaphorical sense, as we have discussed. You must
avoid this misconception that the growth of the soul means
that it fills out, as it were, a larger space, whereas in fact
a more skillful soul has a greater power to act than a less
skillful one. It is important to notice, however, that the kind
of subjects that make up its diet of learning has a decisive
influence on the soul's girth, to use this expression. Consider:
physical growth is of three kinds. One is necessary for the
healthy and harmonious development of the different parts
of the body. A second is abnormal, that which retards the
healhy growth of some parts of the body, as sometimes
96 SAINT AUGUSTINE

happens when a baby is born with six fingers, or in other
cases when deviation from the normal is so pronounced that
babies are called monstrosities. The third kind of growth is
injurious and is what we call a tumor. In this condition the
bodily part does indeed grow larger and occupies greater
space, but only at the expense of good health. So, too,
growth in the soul is normal when its increased size, so to
speak, results from studies of the moral good that are cal-
culated to promote the good and happy life. Studies that are
taken up with things that are more curious than solidly worth-
while—granted even that on occasion they are not entirely
useless—dissipate the mind and hence must be put in our
second category. Just because one flute player so delighted
the ears of the populace, according to Varro, that they
made him a king is no reason for supposing that we can
effect enlargment of the mind by flute playing; any more
than, if we had heard that a man, endowed with abnormally
large teeth, killed an enemy with a bite, we should wish to
have the same kind of teeth. There is, finally, a third class
of studies that enfeebles the soul, inflicting on it a grievous
wound; for to employ the sense of smell and taste in the
dainty appraisal of food, to know how to tell from what
lake a fish was hooked or from what vintage a wine was
made, is surely a deplorable cultivation of the soul. Such
training, while appearing to enlarge the soul, merely shrivels
the mind and dilates the senses, and must be said, therefore,
to produce in the soul nothing else than a tumor or a case
of mental rickets.

Chapter 20

(34) E. The point you make is well taken and I agree
entirely with you. Yet I am not a little puzzled by the fact
that, no matter how closely we look at it, the soul of a new -
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 97

born child is altogether untrained and unskilled. Why does
it not bring with it some art, if it is eternal?

A. You raise a very important question; in fact, I do not
know of one more important on which our views are so di-
ametrically opposed. For, while in your view the soul has
brought no art with it, in mine, on the other hand, it has
brought every art; for to learn is nothing else than to recall
and remember.’ But, do you not see that this is not the right
place to investigate that point. Our concern now is evidently
with the problem whether the soul is called large or small ac-
cording to the extent of space. Whether it is eternal, if it is,
will be conveniently examined with the question you asked
fourth: Why it was given to the body— a question we shall
begin to discuss as soon as it is proper to do so. Whether
the soul always was or not, whether it will always be, or
whether it is at one time uncultivated, at another cultivated—
these questions have nothing to do with its magnitude, since
we have proved earlier that the duration of time is not the
cause even of bodily growth, and since it is evident that
lack of skill is compatible with bodily growth and that
mental alertness is often the ornament of physical decline.
These and many other arguments suffice to prove that the
soul does not grow larger in proportion to the greater bulk
that the body takes on with the passing years.

1 In his Retractationes 1.8 Augustine wri My statement that lear-

ing is simply remembering and recalling is not to be taken as if
1 approved the doctrine that the soul had sometimes existed.in another
body, here or elsewhere, or in its own body or out of it. . . Surely
the soul does not bring with it all the arts nor does it possess them
in the same way. For, as regards the arts that pertain to the senses
of the body—many branches of medicine and all of astrology—unless a
man learns them, he cannot say that he has them. But, those arts
which pertain to the understanding alone, these he masters for the
reason | mentioned, when he has been wisely questioned and reminded
either by himself or another, and thus brings forth the right answer.’

98 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 21

(35) Let us examine, therefore, if you wish, the force of
that other argument of yours, namely, that the soul, which
we would find to be without any material extension, feels
the sensation of touch over the entire surface of the body.

E. My inclination would be to pass on to that question,
were it not that a difficulty remains in connection with
strength. How is it that bodily development confers greater
strength on the soul, if it does not enlarge the soul? Although
the seat of virtue is the soul and of strength, the body,
according to the common opinion, nevertheless, I would
never separate strength from the soul, since, when the soul
leaves the body, so, too, does strength. It is through the
body, of course, that the soul uses its strength, as it does the
senses. Yet, because these are the operations proper only to
a living person, who can doubt that bodily strength also
really belongs to the soul? Since we see, therefore, that grow-
ing boys have more strength than infants and that the vigor
of young men surpasses that of boys, until finally, as the body
grows old, its strength wanes, this to me is no slight indica-
tion that the soul grows larger with the body and again ages
with it.

(36) A. Your statement is not altogether absurd. But,
as I see it, strength results not so much from the bulk of the
body and growth in years as from a certain training and
formation of the members. To prove this to you, I ask you
this question: Would you say that a man who outstrips
another in walking, and is less tired, has the greater strength?

E. Y think so.

A. Why, then, as a boy could I cover more ground in
hunting birds without getting tired than when, as a young
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 99

man, I devoted myself to other studies that required a more
sedentary life, if greater strength is to be attributed to growth
in years and consequent enlargment of soul? Again, it is not
the weight and size of the body that wrestling trainers are keen
to look for in wrestlers, but the knots of their muscles, the
shape of their biceps and the general posture and carriage of
the body; from these points they make a good estimate of
the man’s strength. These physical traits are not worth much
in themselves unless accompanied by technique and training.
It is not an uncommon sight to see fellows of massive frame
beaten by small and slight men in moving and in lifting
weights and even in wrestling. Who does not know that an
Olympic star is more quickly worn out on a journey than a
pack peddler who could be knocked down by one of the
other fellow’s fingers? Hence, if we do not speak of all strength
in the same way, but qualify it as more fitted now for one
task, again for another; and if the form and figure of the
body count more for strength than its size; and if train-
ing is so important that it is commonly believed that the man,
who has lifted every day a little calf, could easily lift and
hold up the calf when it has grown to be a bull, without feel-
ing the greater weight that it took on little by little—if all
this be so, then the greater strength of age does not mean at
all that the soul has grown with the body.

Chapter 22

(37) If the larger bodies of animals possess greater
strength because they are larger, the reason is that, by the
law of nature, what is lighter yields to what is heavier. This
is so not only when the force of gravity carries them to their
proper place, as moist and earthy bodies fall toward the
center of the earth, which is the lowest point downward,
100 SAINT AUGUSTINE

and, to the contrary, aery bodies and bodies of fire go
upwards, but also when some mechanical thrust, or impulse,
or rebound forces them to follow a course quite different from
one they follow of their own natural inclination. When
you drop two stones of unequal size from a height at the
same time, the larger stone reaches the ground sooner,! but,
if the smaller is placed under the larger and securely held
in that position, the smaller yields and is brought to the
ground at the same time as the larger. Likewise, if the heavier
stone is thrown down from above and the lighter is hurled
upwards against it, at the point of contact the lighter will
of necessity be forced back and down. Lest you think that
this happens because the lighter stone was being forced
against its nature to go upwards, whereas the other was seek-
ing its natural place with greater speed, suppose that the
heavier stone is hurled upwards and it meets the lighter stone
on the way down. You will see in this case that the lighter
stone is stopped and forced upwards, but, on the rebound,
falls to a different spot from the one to which its unimpeded
fall would carry it. Again, if both, not by natural motion but,
so to say, like two men in combat on a field, are thrown one
against the other and crash together in mid-air, who would
doubt that the smaller will give way to the larger in that
direction to which the larger was moving? Since these facts
are so, namely, that lighter weights yield to heavier weights,
another important factor is the force with which they are
put in motion. If the lighter be hurled with greater force,
as by some powerful machine, and flung against a heavier
body that was thrown with less force, or is already losing
its momentum, though the lighter weight may rebound, still

1 Augustine is following the common misconception that was not
corrected until the time of Galileo (1564-1642) .
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 101

it lessens the speed of the heavier or even drives it back,
depending upon the relation of impact and weight.

(38) With this knowledge in mind, as far as the present
discussion demands, see now whether those forces which
are called strength in animals harmonize with this reasoning;
for who will deny that the bodies of all animals are possessed
of weight? Now, an animal moves its weight wherever it wishes
by an impulse of its soul, and, of course, the amount of
weight the animal has is not a negligible factor. But the
soul’s impulse makes use of the sinews as ropes to move the
weight of the body. Now, moderate dryness and heat nourish
the sinews and make them more ready, whereas damp
rigidity relaxes and weakens them. Sleep, therefore, makes
the members languid, because, according to the physicians,
it is cooling and dampening; and men just roused from sleep
have little or no energy. Therefore, nothing is more pliable
and nerveless than meu in a state of lethargy. And it is evident
that the influence of wine or of a high fever unbalances the
mind of some men and by generating heat so molds and
hardens their sinews that they can struggle and perform
greater feats of strength than they could in a normal condi-
tion, even though their bodily frame is quite reduced and
weakened by illness. If what we call strength, therefore, is
made up of an impulse from the soul, the mechanism of nerve
sinews and the weight of the body, it is the will that supplies
the impulse which is considerably stimulated by hope or
courage, but retarded through fear and much more through
desperation (for fear, provided there be some hope, usually
increases strength). The harmonious development of the body
perfects the mechanism; moderate health keeps it in order and
regular exercise hardens it; weight is supplied by the mass of
the members which age and nourishment build up, but
102 SAINT AUGUSTINE

which nutrition alone restores. The man who is equally
superior in all of these is a marvel of strength; in proportion
to their absence one man is less strong than another. Again,
it often happens that the combination of persevering will
power and better muscular development makes up for slight
weight and in the test proves superior against the odds of
sheer weight. Yet again, sometimes the size is so great that
even with slight exertion it may crush the supreme effort of a
smaller adversary. When, however, through no lack of physi-
cal weight or muscular training or will power (which is
the soul), a stronger man is beaten by a weaker and a craven
soul is worsted by a bolder spirit, I do not know whether this
is attributed to strength—unless one is to hold that the soul
has its own resources, bringing forth of itself an abundance
of daring and confidence. These qualities one man has;
another has not. Hence it is understood how far superior the
soul is to its own body, even in performing actions that are
done through the body.

(39) Wherefore, since the impulses of a young child are
fully developed only to pull or push, and its sinews lack
strength because of their recent and imperfect formation, lack
endurance because of the natural softness of the immature
body, and lack hardness because of no exercise; since,
moreover, its weight is so slight that it hardly exerts any
pressure in colliding with another body and is more liable to
be hurt itself than to do harm—who will not think it a sound
and prudent inference to hold that the soul has actually
grown larger when he sees and knows that the passing years
have remedied all these deficiencies and supplied strength
which, increasing day by day, is at the service and command
of the soul? Such a man would be inclined to conclude that,
if he sees little, light darts issuing from a lax bow, which a
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 103

youth, hidden from view by a curtain, is using with all his
might, and sees these darts make rather short flights and soon
drop to the ground; and, if, a little later, he sees full-fledged
arrows, weighted with iron, flung high into the sky from a
strong bow; and, then, if he is informed that both perform-
ances are the result of equal exertion by one and the same
archer—such a man, I say, would be inclined to conclude that
the archer had grown and increased his strength in that
short interval. And what conclusion could be more at variance
with the truth than this?

(40) Then again, if the soul does grow, see how foolish
it is to infer its growth from the vigor of the body, and not
from the fullness of its knowledge, since the former it
merely directs; the latter it possesses as its very own. More-
over, if we think that the soul grows larger by the addition
of strength, we must admit that loss of strength reduces its
stature. But strength is diminished in old age and also by the
labor of study, but during those periods knowledge is gathered
and built up. And it is impossible for anything to be both
increased and diminished at one and the same time. Greater
strength in greater age, therefore, is no proof that the soul
grows. Many more comments can be made, but, if you are
now satisfied, I draw the line so that we may pass on to other
questions.

E. I am quite convinced that greater physical strength
is not the result of the soul’s physical growth; for, to pass
over other keen observations of yours, not even a crazy man
would say that the soul grows in a fit of insanity or during
illness that reduces the body, although everyone knows that
insanity and fever usually make the victim more violent
than does health. Therefore, please take up now the question
which I am all attention to hear: Why the soul feels where-
104 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ever the body is touched, if the soul’s magnitude has not the
same spatial extent as that of the body.

Chapter 23

(41) A. Go ahead, then. Let us proceed, as you wish,
but you will have to follow me more closely, perhaps, than
you think. Therefore give me your best attention and answer
me what sort of a reality you think a sense is which the soul
uses through the body. For it is called sense by its proper
name.

E. I usually hear the senses spoken of as five: seeing,
hearing smelling, tasting, and touching. I do not know what
more to answer.

A. That division is very ancient and commonly used by
the old masters of rhetoric. But I would have you define sense
for me, so as to take in all five in one definition and not to take
in anything that is not sense. If you cannot do this, it is
all right. At least you can do this—and it will be enough—
you can either reject or support my definition.

E. Possibly I shall not fail you in that, as far as I can,
but even that is not always easy.

A. Listen carefully, then, for I think that sensation is ‘a
bodily experience of which the soul is not unaware."

E. This definition satisfies me.

A. Stand by it as your own, then, and defend it while I
demolish it bit by bit.

E. I will, indeed, defend it with your help; otherwise,
no. Already I find it unsatisfactory; you have good reason for
wishing to refute it.

1 Literally, ‘sensation is a passion of the body, which [passion] does not
escape the notice of the soul.’ Augustine's account of sensation is

uite unsatisfactory. For an excellent summary and criticism of his
theaty, ct. V. Bourke, Augustine's Quest of Wisdom 111-12.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 105

A. Do not rely too much on authority, especially mine,
which is zero. And, as Horace says,” ‘Dare to have a mind
of your own,’ lest fear guide you sooner than reason.

E. I have no fear at all, no matter how the problem may
turn out, for you check me from going wrong. But begin, if
you have anything to say, lest I be worn out by the delay, not
by the defense.

(42) A. Tell me now, what does your body experience
when you see me?

E. It experiences something, to be sure, for my eyes are
part of my body, if I mistake not; and if they experience
nothing, how could I see you?

A. But it is not enough for you to show that your eyes ex-
perience something, unless you indicate also what they
experience.

E. What, then, do they experience except sight, for they
see? If you were to ask me what a sick man experiences,
I should answer: sickness; what a sensuous man: sensuality;
what a fearful man: fear; what a joyful man: joy. Why,
therefore, not answer your question thus: that a seeing man
experiences sight?

A. But, a joyful man feels joy—or will you deny that?

E. On the contrary, I am agreed.

A. I should say the same of the other emotions.

E. I hold the same.

A. But, whatever the eyes perceive, that they see.

E. I should not say that at all. Who sees pain, which the
eyes often feel?

A. It is clear that you are thinking about eyes; you are
wide awake. Now, then, see whether, just as the joyful man

2 Epistles | ii 40.
106 SAINT AUGUSTINE

feels joy by being joyful, the man who sees experiences sight
by seeing.

E. Can it be otherwise?

A. Whatever the man who sees feels by seeing, that he
must necessarily see.

E. No, not necessarily; for, if he feels love by seeing, does
he then see love?

A. Very guardedly and shrewdly said. I am happy that
you are not easily deceived. But now, mark this. Since we are
agreed that not everything that the eye feels is seen and,
again, that not everything that is felt by seeing is seen, do you
think that this at least is true—everything that is seen is
also perceived?

E. Unless I admit that, I do not see how seeing can be
called sensation.

A. But, do we not experience everything that we perceive?

E. That is so.

A. Therefore, if we perceive everything we see and if we
experience everything we perceive, then we experience everv-
thing we see.

E. I make no objection to that. .

A. Therefore, when we see each other, you experience
me and, conversely, I experience you.

E. So I think. Reason forces me to this conclusion at once.

(43) A. Take the rest, for I believe it would appear
very absurd and stupid to you, if anyone should declare that
you there experience a body, where the body itself which you
experience is not.

E. It does seem absurd, and I think your statement is
Correct.

A. Now, is it not evident that my body is in one place;
yours, in another?
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 107

E. Of course.

A. But, your eyes perceive my body and, if they perceive,
they certainly experience. Again they cannot there experience,
where what they experience is not. Yet, your eyes are not
there where my body is. Therefore, they experience. where
they are not.

E. Of course I granted all those statements because I
thought it unreasonable not to grant them. But this last state-
ment, which is the conclusion of the previous statements, is
altogether so foolish that I prefer to admit that some one of
my former admissions is unwarranted rather than that this
conclusion is true. I should not dare to say even in my dreams
that my eyes perceive where they are not.

A. Look, then, where you have dozed off. How could
anything take you so badly off guard, if you were as wide
awake as you were a while ago?

E. I am going over the argument in my mind very care-
fully and slowly. Still, it is not sufficiently clear what statement
I regret having granted, unless possibly it may be this: that
our eyes perceive when we see. Perhaps it is sight that
perceives.

A. And so it is, for sight goes forth and through the eyes
shines far to light up what we see. Hence it follows that there
it sees where the object is which it sees, and not at the point
where it goes out to see. It is not you, then, that see, when you
see me.

E. Who would be so mad as to say that? Of course I see,
but I see by means of sight sent forth through the cyes.

A. But, if you see, you perceive; if you perceive, you are
acted upon; and you cannot there be acted upon where you
are not. But you see me where I am; therefore, you are acted
upon where I am. But, if you are not there where I am, I
know not how you dare say that I am seen by you.
108 SAINT AUGUSTINE

E. By means of sight, I say, reaching out to that place
where you are, I see you where you are. That I am not there
I admit. But, just as though I were to touch you with a rod,
I would be the one touching you and I would perceive it; yet
I would not be there where I would be touching you. So it
is when I say that I see you by means of sight, although I am
not there where you are; I am not by this forced to admit
that it is not I who see.

(44) A. Therefore, you have admitted nothing rashly;
for your eyes can be defended in this way, too. Their sight is
like a rod, as you say, and that conclusion, therefore, is not
unreasonable that your eyes see where they are not. Or have
you a different view?

E. It is just as you say. Moreover, I observe this, now,
that if the eyes did see there where they are, they would
also see themselves.

A. You would be more accurate if you said not that they
would see themselves also, but that they would see themselves
only. For, where they are, that is the place which they occupy
and occupy alone, and the nose is not there where they are,
nor anything else near them. Otherwise, you also would be
here where I am, because we are so close together. Therefore,
if the eyes were to see only there where they are, they would
see only themselves and nothing else. But, since they do not
see themselves, we must agree not only that they can see there
where they are not, but that they can see only where they are
not.

E. Nothing shakes my certainty on this point.

A. You are certain, then, that the eyes are there acted
upon where they are not, for, where they see, there they per-
ceive; for seeing is perceiving and perceiving is being acted
upon. Therefore, where they perceive, there they are acted
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 109

upon. But, they see in a different place from where they are.
Therefore, they are acted upon there where they are not.
E. It is marvelous how I judge these conclusions to be true.

Chapter 24

(45) A. Perhaps your judgment is correct. But now,
answer this question: Do we see everything that we know by
means of sight?

E. I believe so.

A. You also believe, then, that what we know by seeing,
we know by means of sight?

E. I believe that, also.

A. Why, then, when we see only smoke, do we generally
know that there is hidden beneath it a fire which we do
not see?

E. What you say is true. And now I think that we do
not see whatever we know by means of sight; for we can, as
you have pointed out, by seeing one thing, know another
that sight has not reached.

A, What of this? Is it possible for us not to see the object
that we perceive by means of sight?

E. No, it is not possible.

A. Therefore, to perceive with the sense is one thing; to
know is another.

E. Altogether different; for we perceive the smoke that we
see, and from that we know the presence of the fire which
we do not see.

A. You understand rightly. But you certainly see that when
this happens, our body, that is, our eyes, have no experience
of the fire, but only of the smoke, which is all that they see.
For, we have agreed before that to see is to perceive and to
perceive is to be acted upon.
110 SAINT AUGUSTINE

E. I hold that and I am agreed.

A. When, therefore, there occurs a bodily experience which
makes the soul aware of something, the phenomenon is not
Íor that reason called an activity of one of the five senses,
but only when the soul is aware of the bodily experience itself.
For, that fire is not seen, or heard or smelled or tasted or
touched by us, yet, through the sight of smoke, the soul
becomes aware of the fire. While, therefore, this awareness
of the soul may not be called an activity of sense, because
the body has no experience of the fire, yet it is called knowl-
edge through sense, because the presence of the fire was
suspected and established from an experience which the body
had, even though it was an experience of something different,
that is to say, from seeing something other than the fire.

E. I understand and I see very well that this squares with
and supports that definition of yours which you gave me to
defend, for so I recall your definition of sensation as ‘a bodily
experience of which the soul is not unaware.’ Therefore, the
seeing of smoke we call a sensation, for the eyes experienced
that by seeing, and the eyes are parts of the body and
corporeal, but the fire, of which the body had no experience,
although the presence of the fire is known, we do not call
an object of sensation.

(46) A. I am delighted with your memory and your
ability to follow the argument, but your defense of this defini-
tion begins to crumble.

E. Why, I ask.

A, Because you admit, I believe, that, when we are grow-
ing or when we grow old, the body is being acted upon. Yet
it is clear that we do not perceive this action by any one of
the senses, and still the soul is not unaware of it. Therefore,
there is one bodily experience of which the soul is not
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 111

unaware, and yet it cannot be called sensation. For, seeing
things become larger, which formerly we had seen smaller,
and seeing men grown old who once were certainly youths
and boys, we conclude that our bodies, too, even now while
we are talking, undergo some such change. And in this way
I think we are not deceived. I am more inclined to state that
I am deceived in what I see than in what I understand,
namely, that my hair is growing now or that the body under-
goes constant change. If this change, then, is an action upon
the body, which no one denies, and if it is not perceived by
our senses, and yet the soul is not unaware of it, this, then,
is a bodily experience of which the soul is not unaware, and
it is not sensation. Hence, that definition which should in-
clude nothing that is not sensation is surely deficient, since
it includes this.

E. Nothing remains for me, I see, but to ask you to
construct another definition or to correct this one, if you can,
for I cannot deny that it is defective for the compelling reason
you pointed out.

A, It is a simple matter to correct this, and I would like
you to try. If you understand where it errs, you will do so,
believe me.

E. Does it err in any other point than in including what is
outside its scope?

A. In what way, then?

E. Because even the body of a young man grows old;
hence it cannot be denied that it is being acted upon. Since
we know this, here is bodily experience of which the soul
is aware. Yet, that experience is not perceived by any sense,
for I see that I am now growing old and I do not perceive it
by hearing, smell, taste, or touch.

A. How, then, do you know it?

E. I gather it from reason.
112 SAINT AUGUSTINE

A. On what grounds does your. reason rest?

E. The fact that I see other men old, who, as I now am,
were once young.

A. Does not that perception come to us through one of the
five senses?

E. Who denies that? But, from the fact that I see them
I conclude that I, too, am growing old, a fact which I do
not see.

A, What word, then, do you think must be added to this
definition to make it perfect? Is it not rather this way, that
sensation is a bodily experience of which the soul is not
unaware, but such an experience that the soul does not come
to know it through a different experience or through any-
thing else.

E. Please state that a little more clearly, I beg you.

Chapter 25

(47) A. I will satisfy you, and all the more willingly, if
you go slowly rather than hurry. See that you pay strict
attention, for, what I shall say will be useful also for other
points. A definition contains nothing less, nothing more, than
that which it undertakes to explain; otherwise, it is a bad
definition. Now, whether a definition is free of such faults is
discovered by inversion. A few examples will make this clearer
to you. If you were to ask me: What is man?—and if I were
to define him this way: Man is a mortal animal—you should
not be satisfied with the definition because it contains some
modicum of truth. By adding one little word, namely, ‘every,’
and by inverting the definition, you should see whether the
definition will also be true, when inverted; that is to say, you
should see whether, just as ‘every man is a mortal animal’ is
true, so would it be true that ‘every mortal animal is a man.’
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 113

And, this being found to be false, you should reject the
definition, because it includes what does not belong to it.
For, not only man, but every brute beast is mortal. This
definition of man is usually completed by adding ‘rational.’
just as every man is a rational animal subject to death,
so every rational animal subject to death is a man. The
previous definition erred by including too much, for it
included brute beasts with man; the present definition is
correct, because it includes every man, and only man, and
nothing else besides. A definition is likewise faulty by taking
in too little, as, for example, if you add 'grammarian': for,
although every rational, mortal, grammarian animal is a
man, many men who are not grammariaus are not included
in this definition. Therefore, this definition in its first state-
ment is false, but, when inverted, is true. That every man
is a mortal, grammarian animal is untrue, but, it is true that
every mortal, grammarian animal is a man. When a definition
is false both in its first expression and when inverted, it is
surely more defective than either of these, as for example,
these two: Man is a white animal or man is a four-footed ani-
mal. For, if you say every man is a white animal or every man
is a quadruped, the statement is false, and it is false if you
invert it. But, there is this difference, that some men come
under the former, for most men are white, but the latter
applies to none, for not a single man is a quadruped. For
the present, this instruction on sounding out definition shows
you how they may be tested by direct expression or by
inversion. There are many other lessons of this kind, abound-
ing in verbiage and vagueness, which, little by little, as the
occasion warrants, I shall try to teach you.

(48) For the present, turn your attention to our defini-
tion and now, with your greater knowledge, after studying
114 SAINT AUGUSTINE

it, correct it, for we discovered that the supposed definition
of sensation contained something that was not sensation and,
therefore, was not true when inverted. It is possibly true that
every bodily experience of which the soul is not unaware is
sensation—just as it is true that every man is a mortal
animal, but false that every mortal animal is a man, because
the brute beast is also that. So it is untrue that every
bodily experience of which the soul is not unaware is sensation,
because our fingernails are growing now and the soul is
not unaware of that fact, for we know it; yet we do not
perceive it by the senses but by reasoning. Just in the same
way, therefore, as ‘rational’ was added to the definition of
man to make it correct, thereby ruling out the brute beasts
that had been included—and hence our definition now
includes every man and nothing but a man—what word, do
you think, must be added to our definition so as to eliminate
what is extraneous and to include only sensation and every-
thing that is sensation?

E. I think that something must be added, but, what the
word is I do not know.

A, Surely, sensation is always a bodily experience of which
the soul is not unaware, but this proposition cannot be
inverted, because there is the experience of the body in grow-
ing or shrinking that we know and of which the soul, there-
fore, is not unaware.

E. That is true.

A. How, then, is this experience revealed to the soul: by
the experience itself or by something else?

E. By something else, of course, for it is one thing to see
the fingernails grown larger; another thing to know that
they grow.

A, Since, then, growing is itself an experience of the body
which none of the senses perceives, and this growth which we
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 115

see results from the experience and is not the experience itself,
it is clear that we do not know the experience itself directly,
but through something else. For, if it were not revealed to
the soul by something else, would we not perceive it instead of
concluding that it exists?

E. I understand.

A. Why, then, do you hesitate as to what word should be
added to the definition?

E. I see now that the definition must be formulated in such
a way that sensation will be a bodily experience of which the
soul is aware directly, for I believe that every sensation is
that and that all that is likewise sensation.

(49) A. If that is true, I acknowledge the definition to be
complete. But, let us make a test, if you will, to see whether
the definition is not tottering from the second fault, like the
definition of man to which the term ‘grammarian’ was added.
You recal that we said that man is a rational, mortal,
grammarian animal, and that this definition is wrong, be-
cause, while inverted it is true, as it stands it is untrue. For,
that every man is a rational, mortal, grammarian animal
is untrue, although it is true that every rational, mortal,
grammarian animal is a man. Therefore, that definition falls
down because it includes only man, but not every man. Now,
perhaps the same is true of this definition which we are prid-
ing ourselves is perfect. For, although every direct awareness
in the soul of a bodily experience is sensation, not every
sensation is that. And you may understand this from the fol-
lowing: Brute animals, for example have sensations, and
nearly all animals have these five senses in their vigor, as far
as nature has endowed them. Or will you deny this?

E. Not at all.
116 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 26

A. Do you grant this: that knowledge exists only when
something is perceived and known by certain reason?

E. I grant that.

A. But, brute animals do not use reason.

E. I grant that, too.

A. Knowledge, therefore, does not exist in the brute
animal. But, when something is not hidden, it is certainly
known. Therefore, brute animals have no sense perceptions,
if every sensation includes a direct experience of the body
of which the soul is aware. But, they do have sense percep-
tions, as was granted a little while ago. Why, then, do we
hesitate to reject this definition which cannot include every
sensation, since, of course, it excludes the sensation of brute
animals?

(50) E. I confess that I was deceived when I granted to
you that knowledge exists only when something is perceived
by certain reason. When you asked that, I was thinking only of
men, and, of course, I cannot say that brute animals use
reason and I cannot deny them knowledge. For, as I think,
the dog knew his master," whom he is recounted as recogniz-
ing after twenty years, not to speak of other innumerable
facts.

A. Tell me, now, if two things were placed before you
—one as the goal which you are to reach, the other as the
means by which you can reach the goal—which of these
two will you rate higher, and which prefer to the other?

E. Who would hestitate to say that the goal rates higher?

A. Therefore, as knowledge and reason are two distinct

1 Odyssey XVII 292.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 117

realities, do we arrive at reason by knowledge, or at knowl-
edge by reason?

E. These two are so connected, as I think, that one can
be acquired by means of the other, and vice versa. We should
not come to exercise reason, unless we knew that we could.
Knowledge, therefore, preceded, so that through it we have
come to use reason.

4. What is that? Would we ever come without reason to
knowledge, which you say precedes?

E. Never would I say that, for it is the height of rashness.

A. By reason, then, we come to knowledge?

E. That is not so.

A. Then, by lack of reason?

E. Who would say that?

A, By what means, then?

E. By no means; knowledge is born in us.

(51) A. You seem to forget our previous agreement
when I asked you whether you thought that knowledge
implies the perception of something with certainty. For you
answered, I believe, that such appears to you to be human
knowledge. Now you say that man can have some knowledge
without reason perceiving anything. Who does not see that
nothing can be more contradictory than these two statements:
that there is no knowledge unless reason perceives something
with certainty, and that there is some knowledge when reason
perceives nothing? Therefore, I desire to know which of
these two you select; clearly, both cannot be true by any
manner of means.

E. I select the latter statement. Indeed, I confess that I
granted the former without thinking. For, in our present
pursuit of truth by question and answer, how could reason
come to a conclusion, unless something has been granted
118 SAINT AUGUSTINE

beforehand? Moreover, how could one reasonably grant what
he doesn’t know? So, then, unless this reason found in me
something known as a starting point for leading me on to what
is unknown, I would never learn anything by reason and I
would never call it reason. Therefore, you have no leg to
stand on in disagreeing with me that, prior to reason, there
must be some knowledge in us which reason itself uses as a
starting point.

A, I grant what you say and, as often as you acknowledge
your mistake in making an admission, I will allow you to cor-
rect yourself. But do not abuse this privilege, I beg you, by
paying scant attention to my questions, lest the habit of
making unwarranted conclusions compel you to deny what
you ought to admit.

E. Proceed rather to the remaining points, for, although
I will do everything possible to increase my vigilance (for
I am indeed ashamed of blundering so often in my judg-
ment), yet I will never allow my embarrassment to over-
whelm me and prevent me írom correcting a blunder,
especially if you lend me a helping hand. Stubbornness is
surely not a treasure because consistency is a jewel.

Chapter 27

(52) 4. May that bright jewel be yours as soon as
possible: your pithy saying pleases me very much. Now,
pay strict attention to what I wish to say. My question is:
What do you think is the difference between reason [ratio]
and reasoning [raticinatio]?

E. I fail to see any clear distinction.

A, Look at this, then. See whether you think that in a
youth, or a man, or (to remove any ground for doubt) any-
one capable of thinking, provided he has a sound mind,
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 119

reason is inherent, in the same way that health is inherent
in the body as long as it is free of disease and wounds. Or is
it sometimes present, sometimes absent, as walking, sitting
down, talking?

E. In the sound mind, I think reason is always inherent.

A, What of this? If you define reasoning as when we learn
something from premises that are granted or are clear in
themselves, either by questioning someone else or by link-
ing up things for ourselves, would you say that we or all
thinking men are doing this always?

E. No, not always, for no man or no thinking man, as I
believe, is always seeking for something by arguing either with
himself or someone else. For, he who is seeking has not yet
found; if he is always seeking, he never finds. The thinking
man, however, has already found (to say nothing more) at
least the thought he lacked and was seeking to discover,
possibly by discussion or some other means.

A. Your statement is correct. I want you to understand
therefore, that the process of being led on to something
unknown from premises that are granted or evident is not
reason itself. This process is not always present in the sound
mind, but reason is.

(53) .E. I understand, but what is the point of all this?

A, Because a little while ago you said that I ought to
agree with you that we have knowledge before reason, on
the ground that reason rests upon the knowledge of some-
thing in leading us to something unknown. But now we have
Íound that when this leading is done, it is not to be called
reason, for the sound mind is not always reasoning, even
though it always has reason. Quite properly, this process
is called reasoning. So that reason, vou might say, is thc
sight of the mind, but reasoning is reason's search, that is,
120 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the actual moving of the sight of the mind over the things
that are to be seen. Hence, by reasoning, we search; by reason
we see. Further, when this sight of the mind, which we call
reason, sees some reality upon which it is focused, we call that
knowledge, but when the mind does not see, though it
focuses its sight, that is called not-knowing or ignorance.
For, not everyone who looks with his bodily eyes sees—an
observation we can readily verify by looking in the dark.
From this it is evident, I believe, that looking is one thing;
seeing, quite another. Applying this distinction to the mind
we call one thing reason, the other, knowledge—unless,
of course, something prompts you to reject this explanation,
or you think the distinction is not clear.

E. The distinction pleases me very much indeed and I am
in hearty agreement.

A. See, therefore, whether you think that we look in
order to see, or see in order to look.

E. On this point not even a blind man would hesitate to
say that looking is for seeing, not seeing for looking.

4. It must be granted, then, that seeing is to be valued
more highly than looking.

E. It certainly must.

A. Knowledge, therefore, must be rated above reason.

E. I see that that follows logically.

A. Would you agree that brute beasts are more excellent
or happier than men?

E. May God avert such monstrous madness.

A. You have good reason for shuddering at such a con-
clusion. But what you just said forces us to that conclusion,
for you stated that they have knowledge, not reason. Man
has reason by which he arrives at knowledge with great
difficulty. But, granting that he reaches it with ease, how
will reason help us to rank men ahead of brute animals,
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 121

since they have knowledge, and knowledge, it has been found,
must be rated higher than reason?

Chapter 28

(54) £.-I am forced either to grant that brute animals
have no knowledge or to offer no objection when they are
deservedly placed before me. But, please explain the story
about Ulysses’ dog; what is the point of it? For, mystified
at the wonder of it, I have been barking up the wrong tree.

A. What do you think is the explanation, except a certain
force of sense perception, not of knowing. Many animals
surpass us in sense perception, and the reason for this is not
to be gone into just now, but in mind and reason and
knowledge God has placed us over them. The sense perception
of animals, aided by the great force of habit, enables them
to pick out the things that satisfy their souls, and this is done
all the more easily because the brute soul is more closely
bound to the body, and, of course, the senses belong to the
body, the senses that the soul uses for food and for the
pleasure that it derives from the body. But, because reason
and knowledge, of which we are treating now, transcend
the senses, the human soul, by means of reason and knowl-
edge, withdraws itself as far as it can from the body and
gladly enjoys the delights of the interior life. The more it
stoops to the senses, the greater its similarity to the brute.
Hence it is that nursing infants, the more they are devoid of
reason, the sharper are they to recognize by sense the touch
and proximity of their nurses and will not bear the odor of
others to whom they are not accustomed.

(55) Therefore, although this is a digression, I am happy
to emphasize the good advice that the soul should not pour
itself out in the senses beyond the measure of necessity, but
122 SAINT AUGUSTINE

rather should recall itself from the senses and become a child
of God again, that is, be made a new man by putting off the
old. There is surely need to begin at this reformation because
of the neglect of God’s law—and no other warning does
Sacred Scripture utter more often in simple truth and in
parable. I should like to develop this point and, of course,
to bind myself by the same law, so to speak, that I lay down
for you, namely, to render an account of myself to myself,
to whom I ought before all others to render an account,
and thus become to God, in the words of Horace,’ ‘a friend
made a bond-servant to his lord.’ This renovation cannot
take place at all, unless we are remade in the image of Him
who gave us that image to keep as a most precious treasure,
when He gave us to ourselves with such a nature that only
He Himself can rank before us.

But, to me no work is more laborious, no activity more
like inactivity, than this renovation of spirit, for the soul
has not the strength to begin or complete it, except with the
help of Him to whom it turns itself. Hence it comes about
that man’s reformation must be sought from the mercy of
Him whose Goodness and Power are the cause of man’s
formation.

(56) But we must get back to our subject. See now,
therefore, whether it is proved to you that the brutes have no
knowledge, and whether all that apparent knowledge which
we admire is merely the result of sensation.

E. It is proved, indeed, and if any point of this question
is to be investigated more thoroughly, I will find another
time for that study. Now I would like to know what you are
making of all this.

1 Satires 11 vii 2-3.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 123

Chapter 29

A. What else, except to show you that our definition of
sensation, which before somehow included more than sensa-
tion, now labors from the opposite vice, because it does
not include every sensation. For, brutes have sensation, but
not knowledge; and whatever is not hidden is known; and
everything that is known surely comes under knowledge. On
all these points we have already agreed. Therefore, either
it is not true that sensation is a bodily experience of which
the soul is not unaware, or else brutes have no sensation,
because they are devoid of knowledge. But, we have made
the admission that brutes have sensation. Therefore, that
definition is defective.

E. I confess that I have no word to say against that.

(57) A. Here is another reason to make us still more
ashamed of that definition. You remember, I believe, that
the third defect of a definition, the worst blunder that
could be made, is verified when the definition is false on both
sides, as, for example, this definition of man: Man is a four-
footed animal. Whoever says and affirms that every man is
a four-footed animal, or that every four-footed animal is a
man, is joking, or else is completely out of his mind.

E. You are right.

A. But, if our definition is found to have that very fault,
do you think that we ought to explode it and eradicate it
from our mind, and the sooner, the better?

E. Who would deny that? But, if possible, I would prefer
not to be destined so long here again and to be plagued with
little questions.

A. Have no fear, our task is done. Or, are you not con-
vinced from our discussions of the difference between beasts
124 SAINT AUGUSTINE

and man that perceiving by sensation is entirely different
from knowing?
E. To be sure, I am thoroughly convinced.

A. Therefore, there is a difference between sensation
and knowledge.

E. There is.

A. We do not have sensation through reason, but by
means of sight, or hearing, or smell, or taste, or touch.

E. I agree.

A. And everything we know, we know through reason.
Therefore, no sensation is knowledge, but whatever one is
aware of comes under knowledge. Therefore, ‘to be not
unaware of something’ no more belongs to sensation than
‘four-footed’ to a man. Therefore, our definition, yours by
adoption, is shown up as not only having trespassed beyond
its own boundaries and quitted its own preserves, but as
having had in fact no ground of its own whatsoever and
as having been from the beginning an unabashed squatter.

E. What, then, shall we do? Will you allow this definition
to make its way out of court in this condition? As for my-
self, I gave it as good a defense as I could, but you are the
originator of the case that deceived us. Although I was
unable to win the verdict, I was present in all good faith.
That is enough for me. But you, if you are accused of
lying, what will you do—you who are the author of the
definition for this heated debate and the deviser of its
shameful betrayal?

A. Is there any one here to act as a judge to whom I or
this definition must show respect? My role here, you see, is
like that of a private lawyer, namely, to attempt to prove you
wrong for the sake of instructing you, so that you may stand
prepared when you come into court.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 125

(58) E. Can you say anything, then, in defense of this
definition which you rashly committed to my unskilled
hands to defend and protect?

A. Of course 1 can.

Chapter 30

E. What is it, I pray you?

A. Although sensation and knowledge are different, that
‘not being unaware’ is common to both, just as animal
is common to man and the brute, although they differ very
much. For, whatever is apparent to the soul, either through
the condition of the body or through the purity of the
intelligence, of that the soul is not unaware. Sensation claims
for itself the first way; knowledge, the other.

E. Docs that definition, then, remain safe and proved?

A. It certainly does.

E. Where, then, was I taken in?

A. When I asked you whether everything that one is
aware of is known. You answered in the affirmative, without
thinking.

E. What, then, would you have me say?

A. That knowledge is not had simply if one is aware of
something, but only if that awareness results from an exercise
of reason. For, if that awareness comes through the body, that
is sensation; if the awareness is direct, that is said to be an ex-
perience of the body. Do you not know that some philosophers,
and very good thinkers, too, thought that not even what
is grasped by the mind is worthy of the name of knowledge,
unless that comprehension is so firm that the mind cannot be
moved from it by any argument?

(59) E. I accept your explanation very gratefully, but,
now that sensation has been gone into most minutely, please
126 SAINT AUGUSTINE

let us go back to the question which set us off on this
explanation. For, I had presented an argument to prove
that the soul is just as big as the body because it feels anyone
touching it from the head to the little toe, whenever contact
is made. We were then carried away to this definition of
sensation, a definition perhaps necessary, but fraught with
delay. And now, if you will, show me the result of all this
labor.

A. "There is fruit, indeed, and very rich fruit at that, for,
all that we were looking for has been achieved. If sensation
is a bodily experience of which the soul is not unaware
directly—a definition which we have discussed at greater
length than you wished, in order that we might hold on to it
most firmly—you remember, then, that we found that the
eyes perceive where they are not, or, rather, that they are
acted upon where they are not.

E. I do remember.

A. You also granted this, unless I am mistaken, and now
I believe you would make the same admission, that the soul
is more excellent and more powerful than the whole body.

E. 'To hesitate on that point would be stupid.

A. Come now. If the body can experience something
where the body is not, because of its union with the soul—
we have found that this happens in the case of the eyes by
seeing—shall we regard the soul, which furnishes the eyes
with their marvelous power, as being so coarse and sluggish
that an experience of the body would escape it, if it should
not lie there at the place where the experience took place?

(60) E. That conclusion upsets me very much, so much,
in fact, that I am completely stunned. I do not know what
to answer and I do not know where I am. What shall I say?
Shall I say that a bodily experience of which the soul is
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 127

aware directly is not sensation? What is it, then, if it is not
that? Shall I say that the eyes experience nothing when we
see? That is most absurd. Shall I say that the eyes experience
where they are? But they do not see themselves and nothing
is where they are, except themselves. Shall I say that the
soul is not more powerful than the eyes, when the soul is
the very power of the eyes? Nothing is more unreasonable.
Or must this be said, that it is a sign of greater power to
experience there where something is than to experience it
where it is not? But, if that were true, sight would not be
rated higher than the other senses.

A. But, when the eyes experience there where they are,
a blow or something falling into them or a flow of moisture,
the soul is aware of these things. That is not an experience
of sight, but is classed as touch. Such experiences can befall
the eyes of a corpse in which there is no soul that could be
aware of them. But, the experience of the eye in a living
body, namely, the experience of sight, is an experience of
something that is there where the eye is not. From this
argument it is clear to anyone that the soul is not contained
in place, since the eye, which is a body, experiences some-
thing that is outside the eye and only things that are ouside,
an experience it never has without the soul.

(61) E. What, then, shall I do, I ask you. By these
reasons can it not be proved that our souls are not in our
bodies? And, if that be true, I do not know where I am.
For, who takes away from me the truth that I myself am my
soul?

A, Do not be disturbed; rather, be of good heart. For,
this thought and consideration recalls us to ourselves and,
as far as may be, takes us away from the body. As for your
suggestion that the soul is not in the body of a living person,
128 SAINT AUGUSTINE

although it may seem absurd to you, there were some very
learned men who entertained that view and I believe there
are some even now. As you see, the question is most difficult
and one that requires a certain purification of the mind to
solve it. But now, consider what other arguments you have
to prove that the soul is long, or wide, or anything like that.
For, that argument of yours from the sense of touch, you
realize, does not come near the truth and has no force to
prove that the soul is diffused throughout the whole body
as is the blood. Or, if you have nothing to add, let us see
what remains.

Chapter 31

(62) E. I would have nothing more to add, if I did not
now remember how much we used to marvel, when we were
boys, that the tails of lizards would quiver after we had cut
them off from the rest of the body. That this movement can
take place without a soul I am unable to convince myself.
And it is also beyond me to understand how it can be that
the soul has no material extension, when it can be cut off
also with the body.

A. I might answer that air and fire, which are retained
in a body of earth and moisture by the presence of the soul,
so that a blending of all four elements is formed, in making
their way to the upper region, when the soul departs, and
in freeing themselves, start a vibration of those little bodies,
more or less rapid in proportion to the freshness of the
wound from which they make their hasty exodus; then the
movement grows weak and finally ceases, while the escaping
elements become less and less, and finally issue forth in their
entirety. But, an incident recalls me from this explanation,
an incident which I saw with my own eyes so recently that
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 129

it deserves credence. A short while ago when we were in
Liguria, these boys of ours' who were with me for the sake of
studies, noticed lying on the ground in a shady spot a many-
footed creeping animal, a long worm, I would say. The
worm is well known but I had never experienced what I
am telling. One of the boys cut the animal in half with the
edge of the stylus that he carried, and both parts of the body
then moved in opposite directions away from the cut with
as much speed and energy as if they had been two living
animals. Frightened at this novel sight, and eager to know
the reason, they brought the living parts to me and to Alypius
where we were sitting. We, too, were astonished to see the
two parts running over the tablet wherever they could. One
of them, touched by the stylus, would turn itself toward the
place of the pain, while the other, feeling nothing, moved
freely on its way. And, more surprising yet, when we tried to
find how far this could go, and we cut the worm, or worms,
in many sections, these would also move, so that if we had
not cut them at all and if the fresh wounds were not visible,
we would have believed that each section had been separately
born and was living its own life.

(63) But, what I said to the boys when they looked at
me, eager for an explanation, I am afraid to say to you
now, for we have already gone so far that, unless I give
you a different answer to support my case, our attention,
after weathering the barrage of so many words, may appear
to have succumbed to the bite of a single worm. I advised
the boys to continue their studies, as they had begun, and
thus they would come at the right time to search out and
learn the answer to these problems, if they warranted an

1 Licentius and Trygetius, pupils whom Augustine took with him to
the villa of Verecundus at Cassiciacum in October, 386. Cf. De beata
vita 6.

130 SAINT AUGUSTINE

answer. But what I said to Alypius, as the boys went away,
and both of us, each in his own way, fell to sifting and
spinning out hypotheses in our search for an answer, if I
wished to explain all this, it would call for more words than
we have used in this dialogue from its start, with all its
meanderings and digressions. But, what I really think, I will
not keep a secret from you. If I had not been well versed
in questions about the nature of a body, the form that is in
the body, about place, time and motion—questions that
succeed in arousing sharp and learned clashes of wits because
of their connection with our present topic—I should be
inclined to bestow the palm of victory on the proponents of
the doctrine that the soul is a body. Wherefore, as far as [
can, I warn you not to allow yourself to be swept along in
your reading or discussion by the torrent of words that
pour out of men who rely too much on the senses of the
body, until you make straight and steady the steps that lead
the soul up to God, My counsel is given lest you be turned
away from that unseen and silent haven to which the soul,
while here on earth, is a stranger, lest you be turned away
more readily by the turmoil of study than the repose of
lethargy.

(64) Now as a reply to this difficulty, which, I see, terribly
upsets you; here is one that is the quickest if not the best of
many, and it is the best suited to you and not the easiest proof
for myself that I can select.

E. Let me have it, I beg you, as quickly as you can.

A. First I say this: If the reason for this phenomenon
that results from the cutting of certain bodies is especially
elusive, we should not be so upset by this one fact, there-
Íore, as to reverse our judgment on many things which
before you saw to be true more clearly than light. For, it
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 131

may be that the cause of this phenomenon is hidden from us
because it is beyond the comprehension of human nature, or,
if known to some one, it is not possible for us to question
him, or, possibly, even if we could question him, our minds
might be too dull to grasp his explanation. Does it become us,
therefore, to slip and allow the truth to be wrenched from
our hold, the truth of the opposite conclusion which we
arrived at by most certain reasons and which we acknowledge
to be indubitably correct? If the replies you made to my
questions retain this full force of their truth and certainty,
there is no reason for our childish fear of this little worm,
even though we cannot establish the cause of its many lives.

For, if you had ascertained beyond the shadow of a doubt
that a certain person is a man of honor, and if you had
discovered him among a gang of thieves whom you had
pursued, and if by some chance he were to drop dead before
you could question him, you would think up any reason what-
ever to explain his association with criminals, even though
it remained a perpetual enigma, rather than attribute it to
a desire of crime and evil fellowship. Since, therefore, from
the many arguments set forth earlier, which you accepted as
most certain, it was made clear to you that the soul is not
contained in place and for that reason lacks that quantity
which we notice in bodies, why do you not take it for granted
that there is some cause why a certain animal, when cut up,
continues to live in each segment and that the cause is not
that the soul can be divided with the body? If it is beyond
our power to discover that cause, is it not better to continue
our search for the true cause, rather than accept one that is
false?
132 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 32

(65) Finally, I ask you whether you think that the sound
of words is different from their meaning.

E. I think they are both the same.

A, Tell me, whence does sound come when you speak?

E. Undoubtedly from me.

A. Does the sun, then, proceed from you when you name
the sun?

E. You asked me about the sound, not about the reality
itself.

A. Sound, then, is one thing and the reality that sound
signifies is another thing. But, you said they were the same.

E. Go on. I admit now that mentioning the sun is one
thing; the reality signified, another.

A. Tell me, therefore, whether, knowing the Latin tongue,
you could name the sun in speaking, if the meaning of the
sun did not precede the sound.

E. I could not, by any means.

A. What about this? If, aiming at proper enunciation,
you paused in silence for a short interval before letting the
word itself fall from your lips, does not that remain in your
thought what the listener is about to hear when you open
your mouth?

E. That is obvious.

A. Now then, while the sun has great magnitude, can that
notion of it which you retain in your thought before pro-
nouncing the word be possibly long, or wide or any such
thing?

E. Not at all.

A. Come, now, tell me. When the word goes forth from
your mouth and I hear it, and think of the sum which you
were thinking of before you uttered and while you uttered
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 133

the word, and now both of us are perhaps thinking of the
same—does it not seem true to you that the word derived
from you the meaning it was to carry to me when I heard it?

E. It does seem true.

A. Now, since a word is made up of sound and meaning,
and the sound refers to the hearing, but the meaning to the
understanding, does it not seem to you that, just as in some
living body, the sound of the word is the body and the
meaning is, as it were, the soul?

E. It does seem very likely.

A. Observe, now, whether the sound of a word can be
split up into letters, while its soul, that is, its meaning,
allows no division, since it is exactly the very thing which you
said a little while ago appears to have neither width nor
length in our thought.

E. I agree completely.

A. What of this? When the sound is split up into its single
letters, does it seem to keep the same meaning?

E. How can the single letters mean the same as the word
that is composed of them?

A. But, when the meaning is destroyed by splitting up
the sound into its letters, does not that seem to you to be like
the withdrawal of the soul from a mangled body? And has
not a kind of death ensued?

E. Not only do I agree, but so heartily that nothing you
have said affords me greater delight.

(67) A. If, therefore, this illustration makes it clear
enough to you how it is possible to cut up the body without
dividing the soul, understand now how the segments of a
body can live, although the soul does not suffer any division.
For, you have admitted, and correctly, I think, that the
meaning—which is like the soul of the sound that is made in
134 SAINT AUGUSTINE

uttering a word—cannot possibly be divided, while the sound
itself—which is like the body—can be divided. Now, in the
noun ‘sun’ any division of the sound leaves no meaning
whatever in the parts. Therefore, after the body of the noun
is rent, we would consider the letters simply as members
bereft of all life, that is, without meaning. But, if we find
some noun whose parts after division can have some meaning,
you must allow that such division did not result in complete
death, as it were, because the parts, considered separately,
evidently retain some meaning and the breath of life, as it
were.

E. I grant that entirely, and now I ask you to produce
the sound.

A. Hear it, for when I turn my attention to the vicinity
of the sun, which name we considered above, Lucifer comes
to mind, and, when this word is split between the second
and third syllable, the first part has a meaning when we say
‘Luci’ So, therefore, life exists in more than one half of its
body. The part that is left also has a soul, for, when you
are told to carry something, that is what you hear. How
could you obey if some one were to say to you: ‘Carry the
book’ [fer librum], if ‘fer’ [carry] has no meaning? Then,
when ‘Luci’ is added, the sound is Lucifer and means a star.
But, when that is taken away, it still signifies something and
therefore retains life, in a certain sense.

(68) But, since everything that the senses perceive is
contained in time and place, or rather, the senses perceive
what time and space contain, then what we perceive by the
eyes is divided by space; what we perceive by the ears is
divided by time. For, just as that worm occupied more space
as a whole than any part of it, so Lucifer takes a longer
amount of time to pronounce than ‘Luci.’ Wherefore, if this
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 135

part of the word has meaning and, therefore, life, in ἃ shorter
interval of time that was reduced by dividing the sound,
not the meaning (for the sound and not the meaning is
extended in time), so in the same way we ought to conclude
about the worm. Namely, even though a part, just because
it is a part, lives in a smaller space after the body has been
cut, we should not conclude that the soul has been cut or
that it is smaller in a smaller space, despite the fact that in
the undivided living worm the soul was the equal possession
of all the parts and the parts occupied a larger space. For,
the soul did not occupy a place, but held the body which was
moved by it. Just as the meaning of a word, without being
extended in time, gave life, so to speak, and filled out all
the letters that take up slight intervals of time [to pronounce].
With this illustration I ask you for the present to be content.
And I see, indeed, that you are delighted with it. But for the
present do not look for a learned disquisition on this subject.
I do not mean one that goes in for deceiving appearances,
but one that takes account of reality itself. This rambling
discourse must be brought to a close and your mind must
undergo training in many other subjects that you lack, for
increasing your mental vision and discernment so that you
may be able to understand most clearly whether what very
learned men say is the objective truth or not, namely that
the soul can in no way be divided in itself, but only by reason
of the body.

(69) Now take my word for it or, if you will, with my
help come to realize how great is the soul, not in extent of
space or time, but in force and power; for, if you remember,
long ago we so posed and divided the question. But, as to
number referring to souls, since you thought that number
refers to this problem, I know not what answer to give you:
I would be more quick to answer that the question of number
136 SAINT AUGUSTINE

should not be gone into or at least that you should postpone
it, rather than say that number and multitude have no con-
nection with quantity or that I could explain such an intri-
cate question to you at this time. For, if I say the soul is one,
you will be upset because in one it is happy, in another un-
happy, and the same thing cannot be happy and unhappy
at the same time. And if I say it is both one and many, you
will laugh and I will not find it easy to restrain your mirth.
But if I say the soul is many, I will laugh at myself, and I
endure forefeiting my own esteem less gracefully than yours.
Listen, now, to what I promise will be a profitable discourse,
but heavy enough perhaps to overwhelm both of us, or at
least one, and to make you decide to withdraw.

E. I accept the condition completely and now I wait for
you to explain the problem which you feel you can handle
conveniently with my help—such as it is.

Chapter 33
THE FIRST DEGREE OF THE SOUL

(70) A. I wish we both could question a man of learn-
ing about this problem, a man not only of learning, but one
endowed also with eloquence and wisdom and every perfec-
tion. I can see him expounding the soul’s power in the
body, its power in itself, its power before God to whom it is
nearest when undefiled and in whom it finds its supreme
and every good. But now, since there is no one else, I dare
not fail you. And this is my reward, that, while I explain to
you the power of the soul out of my own poverty of learning.
I am making an exhibition of my own power before a
receptive audience.

First, then, let me deflate your soaring and boundless ex-
pectation. Do not think that I shall speak of every soul, but
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 137

only of the human soul, which is our only care, if we care
for ourselves. This, then, is my first observation,’ one that is
within easy reach of anyone: The soul by its presence gives
life to this mortal and earthy body; it brings the body to-
gether into a unity and keeps it in unity; it prevents the body
from breaking up and wasting away; it regulates the proper
distribution of nourishment throughout the parts of the body,
giving each its due share; it preserves the apt arrangement
and proportion of the body, not only to delight the eye but
to grow and generate. But, these powers are easily seen to be
the common possession of men and plants. For, we say of
them, too, that they live; we see and acknowledge that every
one of them in its own way is preserved and nourished,
grows and germinates.

THE SECOND DEGREE OF THE SOUL

(71) Rise, now, to the second degree and see the power
of the soul in the senses where life is discerned with greater
clarity. For, no attention should be paid to that foolish
superstition which some illiterate people cherish, a super-

1 In this famous passage Augustine enumerates seven steps or levels
of the soul's power. These steps fall into three groups: in the first
three steps or stages the soul deals with the body or matter, ‘acting’
On it successively with greater power; in the next two stages or acts,
the soul has to do witn itseif; finally, in the last two, the soul goes
to God and dwelts in Him, The last step is really not a step, but a
‘mansion,’ wherein the soul contemplates the Supreme and True Good,
God Himself. V. Bourke, (op. cit. 102) renders the Latin as follows:
Animation, sensation, ratiocination, evaluation, stabilization, fixation
and contemplation, Rand (Founders of the Middle Ages 263)" has
this translation: Vitality, sensation, art, virtue, tranquillity, approach,
contemplation. Augustine's words are: animatio, sensus, ars, virtus,
tranquillitas, ingressio, contemplatio. (35,79). In my translation I have
tried to combine the best points of both translations. For the difference
between Augustine's thought and that of Plotinus, cf. the study by
Sister Mary Patricia Garvey, R.S.M. (St. Augustine, Christian or Neo-
Platonist? 146-160) . For an explanation of the mysticism of St. Augus-
tine, cf. Dom Cuthbert Butler's Western Mysticism, 23-88,

138 SAINT AUGUSTINE

stition that betrays closer affinity to a block of wood than do
the very trees which it idolizes, namely, that the vine is
pained when the grape is plucked, and that such things not
only feel pain when they are cut, but even see and hear. Of
this unholy error this is not the place to speak. Now, then,
to follow my outline, notice in the higher living organism
how great is the soul's power in the senses and in locomotion,
which those things that are fixed to the earth by roots cannot
possibly share with us.

The soul applies itself to the sense of touch; through it it feels
and distinguishes hot and cold, rough and smooth, hard and
soft, light and heavy. Then it distinguishes between un-
numbered differences of taste and smell and sound and
shapes, by tasting, smelling, hearing and seeing. And in all
these it comes to know and seek what suits the nature of its
body; it rejects and shuns what is unsuited. The soul with-
draws itself at certain intervals of time from these senses
and, by taking a vacation, you might say, restores their vigor
and goes over the manifold and disconnected likenesses of
realities which it took in through the senses, and all this is
sleep and dreaming.

Often, too, the simplicity of moving makes it delight in
making gestures and rambling about; without exertion it
maintains order and harmony in its members, for the union
of the sexes it does what it can, and from two natures
through common life and love it aims at molding a new
unity. It provides not only for the generation of offspring
but also for their care, protection and nourishment. Through
habit it becomes linked to the habitat and environment
of the body, and from these it undergoes separation with
reluctance as though they were parts of its body; this force of
habit is called memory when the link with those places
is not dissevered even by separation and the lapse of time.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 139

But all this, no one denies, the soul can do even in brute
beasts.

THE THIRD DEGREE OF THE SOUL

(72) Rise, now, to the third degree of the soul’s power
which is now proper to men, and consider memory not in its
role as the link with familiar situations, but as the recorder
and compiler of facts without number: so many arts of
craftsmen, the tilling of the soil, the building of cities, the
manifold marvels of various buildings and their construction,
the invention of so many signs in letters, in words, in gesture,
in the pronunciation of these, in paintings and carvings.
Consider the languages of so many peoples, the varied teach-
ings, some new, some renewed. Consider the great number of
books and similar documents for preserving memory, and
all this provision for posterity. Consider the grades of duties
and powers and honors and dignities in families, in the state,
in peace and war, in civil and ecclesiastical administration.
Consider the power of reason and of thought, the flowing
streams of eloquence, the varieties of poetry; the thousand
forms of imitation for play and jest, the art of music, the
accuracy of measurements, the study of numbers, the speculat-
ing on things past and future from the present. Great are
these achievements, and distinctively human. Yet, this her-
itage, common to all rational souls, is shared in by the
learned and the unlearned, by the good and the wicked.

THE FOURTH DEGREE OF THE SOUL

(73) Look up, now, and scale the fourth grade, where
moral goodness begins and all true worth resides. From this
point the soul dares to rank itself not only before its own
body, if it is a part of the material world, but even before
140 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the whole material world itself, and it dares to think that the
good of the world is not its good and to distinguish and
despise the counterfeits of its own power and beauty. Hence,
the more it becomes the cause of its own delight, the more
it dares to withdraw from baser things and wholly to cleanse
itself and to make itself spotless and stainless; it dares to be
strong against every enticement that tries to move it from
its resolution and purpose, to esteem human society, to desire
for another nothing that it would not wish for itself; to obey
authority and the laws of wise men, and to believe that
through these God speaks to it. In this noble task of the soul
there is still toil, and against the vexations and allurements
of the world a hard and bitter fight; in this work of purifica-
tion there is underneath a fear of death, often not strong
but sometimes overpowering—not strong, when its faith is
most firm (to see whether this is true, indeed, is permitted only
to the purified soul), that all things are so governed by the
Providence and Justice of God that death cannot possibly
come unjustly to anyone, even though the person who inflicts
death be unjust. But, death is greatly feared on this plane
now, when the Providence of God is so much the less
firmly trusted as it is the more anxiously looked for, and it
is the less seen as tranquillity grows less through fear—tran-
quillity so requisite for pursuing the study of these most
puzzling matters. Finally, as the soul perceives more and
more in proportion to its greater progress how great is the dif-
ference between itself purified and itself defiled, so much the
more it fears, lest, when this body is put off, God may less en-
dure it than it can endure itself defiled. But, there is nothing
more difficult than to fear death and to refrain from the allure-
ments of this world, as the risks involved demand. The soul,
however, is so great that it can do even this with the help, of
course, of the Justice of the supreme and true God—that
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 141

Justice which sustains and rules this universe; by which it
is brought about that all things are, and not only are, but are
in such order that they cannot be better. To this Justice,
in the difficult task of purifying itself, the soul entrusts
itself with complete filial devotion and trust to be helped
and made perfect.

THE FIFTH DEGREE OF THE SOUL

(74) When this shall be accomplished, that is, when the
soul shall have been freed from all disease and cleansed of
all its stains, then finally it possesses itself in all joy and
fears nothing whatever for itself and is not disturbed at all
for any reason of its own. This, then, is the fifth degree.
For, to make the soul pure is one thing; to keep it pure,
another. And the action by which it restores itself from
defilement is altogether different from the action by which
it does not allow itself to be defiled again. On this plane it
conceives in every way how great it is and, when it has
grasped that truth, then, with certain unbounded and incred-
ible confidence, it advances toward God that is, to the
contemplation of Truth itself, that Truth, the highest and
most hidden reward for all the labor it has exerted.

THE SIXTH DEGREE OF THE SOUL

(75) Now, this activity, namely, the yearning to under-
stand what things are true and best, is the soul’s highest
vision. Beyond this it has nothing more perfect, more noble,
and more true. This, therefore, will be the sixth degree of
activity. For, it is one thing to have the eye of the soul so
clear that it does not look about idly or incautiously and see
what is unseemly, and another thing to protect and strengthen
the health of the eye; and it is another thing, again, to direct
142 SAINT AUGUSTINE

a calm and steady gaze upon that which is to be seen. Those
who wish to do this before they are cleansed and healed are
so driven back by the light of truth that they may think
there is in it not only nothing good, but much of evil. They
deny it the name of truth and, by reason of pitiable yielding
to carnal indulgence, they draw back into the caverns of their
own darkness, enduring it because they are ill and cursing
the only remedy of their distemper. Whence, divinely inspired,
the prophet most fittingly prays:* ‘Create à clean heart in
me, O Lord, and renew a right spirit in my breast.’ The spirit
is right, I believe, if it keeps the soul in its quest for truth
from losing the way and going wrong. Such a spirit is not
renewed in a man unless his heart first shall have been made
clean, that is, unless he restrain his thoughts and draw
them off from all mundane attachment and defilement.

THE SEVENTH DEGREE OF THE SOUL

(76) At length, in the vision and contemplation of truth,
we come to the seventh and last step, not really a step, but
a dwelling place to which the previous steps have brought
us. What shall I say are the delights, what the enjoyment,
of the supreme and true God; what breath of undisturbed
peace and eternity? These are the wonders that great souls
have declared, so far as they brought themselves to speak
of these realities, great souls of incomparable greatness, who,
we believe, beheld and now behold these things.

This I now dare say to you in all simplicity, that, if we
hold with all perseverance to the course that God lays down
for us and which we have undertaken to hold, we shall come
by God's Power and Wisdom to that highest Cause, or
Supreme Author, or Supreme Principle of all things, or

2

THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 143

whatever other name you would deem worthy of so great
a Reality. That being understood, we shall see truly how all
things under the sun are no more than ‘vanity of vanities.’*
Vanity is pretense. Vain things are found out to be false,
or deceiving, or both. One may recognize how great is the
difference between vanity and truth. Even though all these
visible things, considered in themselves, are marvelous and
beautiful, having been created by God their Maker, still,
in comparison with the unseen realities, they are as nothing.
From this we shall realize how full of truth are the things
we are commanded to believe, how excellently and health-
fully we were nourished by Mother Church; else, what is
the worth of that ‘milk’ which St. Paul‘ declared he gave as
drink to little ones. It is very proper to take this nourishment
when one is nourished by a mother, but shameful, when
one is already grown; to reject it, when needed, is a pity;
to find fault with it at any time or to despise it is a sign of
impious wickedness, but to explain it and distribute it in a
suitable manner is the clearest proof of goodness and of
charity. We shall also see that this corporeal nature, in
obedience to the divine law, undergoes so many changes and
vicissitudes that we may hold even the resurrection of the
body (which some believe too late; others, not at all)
to be so certain that the rising of the sun, after it has gone
down, is not more certain to us.

Then, indeed, we shall despise those who scoff at the fact
that human nature was assumed by the Almighty, eternal,
changeless Son of God, to be the exemplar and beginning
of our salvation, and that He was born of a Virgin, and the
other marvels of the Gospel narrative, and we shall esteem
these scoffers to be like boys, who, since they see a painter

8 Ecde. 12.
11 Cor. 32.
144 SAINT AUGUSTINE

painting from other drawings which he places before him
and carefully follows, think that a man cannot be painted
unless the painter see another picture.

Moreover, in the contemplation of truth, no matter from
what side we study it, so great is the joy, so great the purity,
the sincerity, and the certainty of faith that one at length
comes to think that the previous knowledge he thought he
had is really nothing. Then death, which was an object of
fear and an obstacle to the soul's fullest union with the full
truth, death, namely, the sheer flight and escape from this
body, is now yearned for as the greatest boon.

Chapter 34

(77) You have heard how great is the soul’s force and
power. Let me summarize what has been said. Just as we
must acknowledge that the human soul is not what God is,
so it must be set down that nothing is nearer to God among
all the things He has created than the human soul. Therefore,
it is handed down in the Catholic Church through special
divine guidance that no creature is to be worshipped by the
soul (gladly do I use the very words in which these truths
were taught me), but that He alone is to be worshipped
who is the Creator of all things that are, ‘from Whom, by
Whom, unto Whom” are all things, that is, the unchanging
Source, unchanging Wisdom, unchanging Love, One True
and Perfect God, who never was not, never will not be;
never was other, never will be other; than whom nothing
is more hidden, nothing more present; with difficulty we
find where He is, with greater difficulty, where He is not;
with whom all cannot be, without whom no one can be
And, if we human beings can with propriety predicate

1 Rom. 11.36,
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 145

anything more wonderful of Him, in keeping with His
nature, that we attribute to Him. Hence, only God is to be
adored by the soul, without discrimination or confusion.
For, whatever the soul adores as God, it must deem more
excellent than itself, and it is impossible to believe that the
earth is superior to the nature of the soul, or the stars, or
moon, or sun, or anything at all that is touched or seen by
these eyes. Rather, reason proves with certainty that a single
soul is of far greater value than all these material things, if
only lovers of the truth will dare to pursue with unfaltering
and respectful steps the path the soul points out, a path
that is hard because it lies beyond the well-worn road of
common experience.

(78) If there is in nature any other reality than those
which the senses know, and which without exception occupy
some dimension of space—and we have said that the human
soul is more excellent than all such things—if, I say there
is any other reality that God has created, it is less excellent
or equal to the soul: less excellent, as the soul of the brute;
equal, as the soul of an angel. But, better than the soul, there
is nothing. And if, sometimes, any of these is more excellent,
that is the result of sin, not of nature. And yet, even by sin
the soul does not become so inferior as not to be preferred
or even compared with the soul of the brute.

God, therefore, who alone is the Maker of the soul, is
alone to be adored by the soul. But man, no matter who he
is, though possessed of wisdom and every perfection, or any
soul whatever, gifted with reason and blessed with all virtue,
is to be loved only and imitated. To it, respect is due in keep-
ing with its merit and station. For, ‘Thou shalt adore the
Lord, Thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve.’

2 Deut. 6.13; Matt. 4.10.
146 SAINT AUGUSTINE

We know that, as far as is lawful and commanded, we
should assist souls of our own kind who have gone astray and
struggle in error, and this task is to be undertaken with the
conviction that its successful issue is to be attributed to God
acting through us. Let us not appropriate anything to our-
selves, deceived by the desire for vain glory, for, by this
one vice we are brought down from the heights and sunk
in the lowest depths. We ought to hate, therefore, not the
victims of vice, but vice; not sinners, but sin. Toward all
men we ought to have the will to help, even those who have
injured us, or wish to harm us, or wish that we be harmed.
This is the true, perfect, and only religion by which it belongs
to the magnitude of the soul, which we are studying now, to
be reconciled to God and by which it makes itself worthy of
freedom. For He whom it is most useful for all to serve, and
to delight in whose service is the only perfect freedom, frees
from all things.

I see that I have almost exceeded the limits of my plan
and, without stopping for any question, I have talked at
great length; yet I do not regret it. For, while these principles
are scattered throughout many writings of the Church, and
though we may seem to have made a convenient digest of
them, yet they cannot be clearly understood, unless one
exerts manly efforts in the fourth of those seven degrees
to preserve piety and to acquire health and strength for
grasping them, and unless one makes each of these degrees
the object of a searching and careful investigation. For, in
each one of those grades, which we might better call acts,
there is a distinct and proper beauty.

Chapter 35

(79) | We are inquiring, of course, about the power of the
soul, and the soul has the power to perform all these acts
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 147

simultaneously, although it may think that it is really doing
only that act which implies some effort, or, at least, some
fear. For, it performs that act with greater attention than the
rest. To teach these grades to anyone, let the acts of the
soul, from the lowest to the highest, be called, first, Anima-
tion; the second, Sensation; the third, Art; the fourth,
Virtue; the fifth, Tranquillity; the sixth, Approach; the
seventh, Contemplation. They can be named also in this
way: ‘of the body’; ‘through the body’; ‘about the body’;
‘toward itself’; ‘in itself’; ‘toward God’; ‘in God’. Or again,
in this way: ‘beautifully of another, beautifully through
another, beautifully about another, beautifully toward a beau-
tiful, beautifully in a beautiful, beautifully toward Beauty,
beautifully in Beauty."

You may ask about any of these later on, if further clari-
fication is needed. For the present I have decided to label
these operations of the soul by these names so that you may
not be troubled when other teachers use a different terminol-
ogy or a different classification, and their diversity prevent
you from accepting one or the other.

For, the same realities can be named in ways without
number and be classified minutely according to different
norms; in such a variety of means, each one uses the way he
considers more suitable.

Chapter 36

(80) God, therefore, supreme and true, by an inviolable
and unchanging law by which He rules all creation, subjects
the body to the soul, the soul to Himself, and so everything to
Himself. In no act does God abandon the soul either for

11 have adopted Rand’s translation (op. cit. 263-64), but I have
written his ‘beauty’ with a capital.
148 SAINT AUGUSTINE

punishment or reward. For, He has judged it to be the most
beautiful, so that it is the exemplar of all reality, and all
reality is so arranged in a hierarchy that anyone who considers
the totality of things may not be offended by the lack of
conformity in any part, and that every punishment and every
reward of the soul should contribute something corresponding
to the measured beauty and arrangement of all things.

To the soul, indeed, is given free choice, and they who
endeavor to undermine it with futile reasonings are so blind
that they do not understand that of their own will they
are voicing these absurd and impious statements. And the
gift of free choice is such that, making use of it in any way
whatever, the soul does not disturb any portion of the divine
order and law. It is conferred by the all wise and all
prevailing Lord of all creation. But, to see these things as they
should be seen is the gift of a few, and one becomes fit for
the gift only by true religion. For, true religion is that by
which the soul is united to God so that it binds itself again
by reconciliation to Him from whom it had broken off, as it
were, by sin.

Religion, then, in the third act forms a link with the soul
and begins to lead it; in the fourth, it purifies; in the fifth,
reforms; in the sixth, it leads into; in the seventh, it feeds.
And this is done rather quickly, in some cases; in others,
slowly—depending upon the worth of each one’s love and
merits. Yet God does all things justly, wisely and beautifully,
no matter what attitude of will His creatures may assume.
In this connection, again, a very difficult question is: What
advantage is there in consecrating infants? We must believe
that it accomplishes some good. Reason will discover this
when the right time comes for investigating that question.
Although I have presented this and many other problems
for you to seek out the solution by personal study rather
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE SOUL 149

than to furnish you with the answer, my purpose will be
accomplished if only you study with a sense of reverence.

(81) In view of our discussion, who can reasonably offer
any complaint because the soul was given to move and manage
the body, since an order of things so great and so divine could
not be better linked together? Or who will think that we
ought to inquire how the soul is affected in this mortal and
frail body, since it is thrust together into death deservedly
because of sin, but by virtue it has the power to rise above
the body? Or what will be its state after death, since the
pain of death must necessarily continue if sin remains, while
for virtue and goodness God Himself, that is, Truth itself, is
the reward?

Wherefore, if you will, let us finally conclude this long
discourse, and let us make it our care to be most vigilant
and exact in fulfilling the commandments of God. There
is no other escape from such evils. But, if any statement of
mine is not so clear as you would wish, make a mental note
of it and ask about it at some other more opportune time.

And the Master of all, who is over us, will not fail us if
we seek Him.

E. I was so thrilled by your discourse that I thought it
would be wrong to interrupt it. If you wish to stop here and
let this summary treatment suffice for the three last questions,
I shall yield to your decision. For a further investigation of
these important problems, I shall try to make both the oc-
casion and my wits more responsive to the exigencies of your
occupations.
INTRODUCTION

HESE SIX Books On Music were begun, before Au-
gustine's baptism, at Milan in 387 a.p., and finished
later in Africa, after the De magistro in 391.’ While

they are, therefore, among the earliest work of his career, they

are not the earliest, but follow the four philosophical di-
alogues of Cassiciacum. They also straddle the period of the
De immortaliate animae, the De quantitate animae and the

De libero arbitrio. They are, however, only one of a series of
treatises on the liberal arts which Augustine started, but never

finished. He speaks of finishing one on Grammar and of start-

ing one each on Dialectic, Rhetoric, Geometry, Arithmetic,

and Philosophy.* Treatises on Grammar, Rhetoric, and Di-

alectic which have come down to us under his name were not

accepted as genuine by the Benedictines. Recent scholars ac-
cept the last one as being a draft of the original done probably
by Augustine himself, and are doubtful about the first two.?

But if these six books On Music are only a fragment of a

projected cycle on the liberal arts, they are, also, only a
Íragment of a larger treatise on music. They are, in the words

of Augustine, ‘only such as pertain to that part called

Rhythm.* Much later, in writing to Bishop Memorius, he

speaks of having written six books on Rhythm and of having

1 See Retractationes, 1.6,11, Migne 33, and Portalié,

2 Retract. 16.

3 See Marrou, St. Augustin et la fin de la cultire antique 576-578, for
a discussion of the authenticity of De dialectica.

4 Retract. 1.6.

"Augustin, in DTC.

153
154 SAINT AUGUSTINE

intended to write six more on Melody (de melo). As we
shall see, this intended part would have been a treatise on-
Harmonics.

It is necessary, for the understanding of these books on
Rhythm, to know what the ancients meant by music, by
rhythm, and by melody. It is true St. Augustine tells us that,
of these six books, the first five on rhythm and meter are
trivial and childish,* but this is a rhetorical statement to in-
troduce to us to the more serious business of the sixth book on
the hierarchy of numbers as constitutive of the soul, the
universe, and the angels. In the same letter to Memorius,
written about 408 or 409 A.p., he also distinguishes the first
five books from the sixth, considering them much inferior,
and sends him only the sixth. This has given Westphal the
opportunity to indulge in irony, to agree with Augustine,
and so to dismiss his treatment of rhythm and meter as some-
thing strange and foreign to the correct ancient theories.’ But
Westphal, in his passion for everything Aristoxenian, did not
always have good judgment; in another case, that of Aristides
Quintilianus, he sacrificed a really excellent treatise on music,
the only complete one to come down to us from the ancient
world, as only a source of fragments of Aristoxenus. Scháfke,
in a recent book,* has tried to bring Aristides’ work back to
its proper place.

It is usually dangerous procedure to ignore the technical
details a thinker uses to test or suggest his general and more
seductive theories. It is too easy to overlook the first five
books and to concentrate on the sixth. It would seem neces-

5 Epist. 101 (Paris 1836).
6 On Music, 6.1.
7 R. Westphal, Fragmente und Lehrsütze der Griechischen Rhythmiker
(Leipzig 1861) 19.
Scháfke, Aristeides Quintilianus von der Musik (Berlin-Schóneberg
1987).
ON MUSIC 155

sary, rather, to place these five technical books in the general
picture of the theory of ancient music, and to try and read
from the Augustinian variations on the ancient themes the
intentions of his mind and doctrine.

As we have said, the only complete treatise on music to
come down to us from the Greeks or Romans is that of
Aristides Quintilianus, a Greek of probably the first part of
the second century a.p. There are a good many treatises on
harmonics, those written from the Pythagorean point of view
such as the Harmonics of Nicomachus, of Ptolemy, and of
Theo of Smyrna, and the Harmonics of Aristoxenus from a
less directly mathematical viewpoint. The treatise of Aristides
combines the two approaches.

The Pythagorean harmonics starts from the fact that two
strings of the same material and thickness, stretched by the
same weight, form the two fundamental consonances (for
the Greeks the only two) when they are in length in the ratio
of 2 to 3 (the perfect fifth) and 3 to 4 (the perfect fourth).
Thus, in moving from the lower to the higher pitch of the
perfect fourth, the ear rests and is satisfied, and in passing
from the higher to the lower pitch of the perfect fifth it also
rests. For ancient music, no other ratios or intervals provided
such a rest. Further, if from the first pitch to the second is
a perfect fourth, and from the second to the third is a perfect
fifth, then from the first pitch to the third is an interval called
the octave, the ratio of the string lengths being 4/3 * 3/2 =
2/1. The characteristic of this interval is that the higher pitch
seems to repeat the lower pitch and vice-versa: the higher
pitch can replace the lower one (and vice-versa) in its rela-
tions with other pitches without changing the essential char-
acter of the relation. The octave, therefore, furnishes a cyclic

9 See Schifke, op. cit., for full discussion of possible dates.
156 SAINT AUGUSTINE

pattern for the musical rclations." From the Pythagorean
point of view the problem of musical intervals is the problem
of whole-number ratios, the smallest possible numbers furnish-
ing the octave and the next smallest the consonances.

The further musical problem was to fill in this octave,
made up of the fourth and fifth, with other pitches to make a
systema or scale. The interval between the fourth and fifth,
called the tone, was taken as fundamental here, that is, in
ratios of string-lengths 3/2 divided by 2/3 — 9/8. The dia-
tonic scale is built by taking two pitches at intervals of a tone
from the lower pitch of the fourth. What is left over of the
Íourth is called a leimma: 4/3 divided by (9/8 * 9/8) —
256/243, which is approximately a semitone. That is, two
such leimmas add up nearly to a tone (256/243)* nearly
equals 9/8. This is the diatonic scheme of the fundamental
tetrachord. The scale can be completed by adding a tone and
then another such tetrachord to fill out the octave: (9/8)'*
256/243 € (9/8)? 4 256/243 = 4/3 * 3/2 = 2/1. This is
one mathematical and one musical solution of the problem
of the octave.!! There were other solutions. It is also possible
to combine tetrachords in other ways: either by taking the
upper pitch of the fourth as the beginning of a new tetrachord
and so continuing, or by constantly jumping a tone before
beginning the new tetrachord.'? But neither of these last two
ways solves the problem of the octave as the first one which
alternates the two.

10 For the reader interested in a more extended account of such relations

there is the introduction to Lord Rayleigh's The Theory of Sound.
11 See Plato, Timaeus 35-96, for a particularly fine derivation of this

solution. See also Theo of Smyrna, for a second-hand account.
12 Aristoxenus, Harmonica 1 17, IIL 59. See also introduction by Macran
to his edition, pp. 10-17.
ON MUSIC 157

Such principles could not be confined by Greek con-
sonances. They could extend themselves to all kinds of rela-
tions, indeed to any relation. And although the purely Greek
restrictions could be given a mathematical rationale in con-
tradiction to what Aristoxenus and his modern supporters
have had to say, since the supply of mathematical relations
is seemingly inexhaustible and all plastic, yet Aristoxenus,
a pupil of Aristotle, preferred to build a system which, if
not totally unmathematical, preserving as it does a neces-
sarily ordinal character, is certainly non-arithmetical. "The
science [of harmonics]’ says Aristoxenus, ‘is reduced to two
things: hearing and reason. For by hearing we distinguish
the magnitudes of the intervals, and by reason we consider
the potentialities of the notes.’"* By potentialities of the notes,
he means their functions within a system of notes, a system
which in turn obeys the fundamental restriction that the only
consonances are the fourth, fifth, and octave, perceived as
such by the ear. The tone is the interval which is the differ-
ence between the fourth and fifth as perceived by the ear.
The fourth is the invariant interval to be filled in by two
movable notes and only two. The movable notes can take
their places continuously within certain limits, and these
limits are further subdivided so that the positions of these
movable notes fall into three classes which define the three
kinds of scales: the diatonic, chromatic, and enharmonic.
It is not necessary for our purpose to discuss these in detail.
The tetrachords so formed can be added to each other (but
only those of the same kind) by disjunction, by conjunction,
or by a combination of both, as we have already explained
above, that is, with a tone between, no tone between, or first
one way, then the other.

13 Ibid. 11 334-9.
158 SAINT AUGUSTINE

The upper note of the lower tetrachord, that is, the upper
limit of the lower fourth, properly filled in with the two
movable notes, is called the mese and is the functional center
of the system of two tetrachords; the potentiality of every
note in the scale is with reference to this mese.'* True, one
or more of the lower notes of the lower tetrachord might be
moved up an octave, or down an octave, and the pitch of the
mese relative to the other notes would be different. With the
survival of only the one method of combining teterachords,
by alternate conjunction and disjunction, the different rela-
tions of pitch of the mese gave rise to the tropoi or modes of
the one series of notes.’* In these different modes the mese is
no longer the center by position, but it remains the musical
center.

Such, then, is the non-arithmetical Greek theory of harmon-
ics which confines itself to principles laid down within a
certain idiom of notes, abstractions from a certain ordered
experience, but not constitutive of that experience as in
the Pythagorean theory.

No strictly Pythagorean treatise on rhythm exists, and of the
Rhythmics of Aristoxenus we have only the fragments piously
and passionately collected by Westphal, first in Fragmente
und Lehrsütze der griechischen Rhythmiker and last in Aris-
toxenos von Tarent, Melik und Rhythmik des Classischen
Hellenenthums. A fragment of the Oxyrhynchus Papyri is also
attributed to him. But the essential theses are repeated in
Aristides Quintilianus. In both of these writers a clear distinc-

14 Ibid. 11 33.82-31.10; Aristotle. Problems XIX 20; also Ptolemy,
Harmonica 11 7, quoted by Macrau. in his Introduction.

15 Th s n. which certainly fits
the facts and the texts. better than the opposing theories of Westphal
and Monro; see Introd. to. Harmonica 21-10. See the same work also
for an account of the extension of the octave and the consequent
emergence of the modes as tónoi or keys,

ON MUSIC 159

tion is made between rhythmics and metrics, a distinction
not so clear in Augustine and other Latin writers.

For Aristides, music is divided into theoretical and prac-
tical. The theoretical, in turn, is divided into the technical
and natural, that which has to do with the art and that
which has to do with the nature. The technical is divided into
three parts: harmonics, rhythmics, and metrics. The natural
is divided into two parts: the arithmetical and the physical.
On the other hand, the practical is divided into the applied
and the expressive. The first of these is divided into melo-
poeia, rhythmopoeia, and poetry, and the second into instru-
mental, vocal, and declamatory.’*

And so the first book of Aristides’ treatise is devoted to the
discussion of the technical part of theoretic music: harmony,
rhythm, and meter; the second book to ends served by the
practical part of music: education and the State; the third
book to the discussion of the natural part of theoretic music:
whole-number ratios and cosmology. Thus, Aristides quite
rightly assigns the Aristoxenian theory its place within the
science of music as a technique, an art depending for its real
validity on the Pythagorean theory. And he might well have
added that it is only one of a possible many, a restricted set
of rules, a particular idiom compared to the mathesis univer-
salis of the Pythagorean theory.

Let us, then, focus our attention on rhythm. ‘Rhythm,’
say Aristides, ‘is a scale of times collated in a certain order,
and their affects we call arsis and thesis, strong and weak."
‘Rhythm is determined in speech by syllables, in melody by
the ratios of arsis and thesis, in movements by the figures and
their limits . . . . And there are five parts of the art of rhythm.
16 Aristides, op. cit, ed. Meibom, I 78.

17 Ibid. 1, p. 49. We give only an outline here. Detailed discussion will
be found in our notes to the treatise.
160 SAINT AUGUSTINE

For we divide it thus: (1) in primary times, (2) on kinds of
feet, (3) on rhythmical tempo, (4) on modulations, (5) on
rhythmopoeia.’"* A rhythmical foot is a part of the whole
rhythm by means of which we comprehend the whole. And
it has two parts, arsis and thesis.? And there are three kinds
of rhythmical foot according to the ratio of arsis and thesis:
the one-one ratio, the one-two, the two-three, and sometimes
a fourth, the three-four. But the inner structure of these
ratios is conditioned by the order of long and short syllables
and, therefore, by the thing rhythmed.

‘Metres,’ says Aristides, ‘are constructed of feet. Then meter
is a scale of feet collated of unlike syllables, commensurable in
length." Some say meter is to rhythm as part to whole; some,
as matter to form; some say that the essence of rhythm is in
arsis and thesis, and the essence of meter is in syllables and
their unlikeness. And for this reason rhythm is constructed
of like syllables and antithetical feet, but meter never of syl-
lables all alike and rarely of antithetical feet.?* Therefore,
rhythm is the repeated sameness of ratio of arsis and thesis,
which informs the syllables of speech, giving a variety of
meters according to the variety of syllable structures and the
variety of strong and weak.

If we compare Augustine’s treatise with the traditional
ones and, in particular, with that of Aristides, it does not
appear as strange as some would make it out. The first five
books deal with rhythm and meter. The last book deals with
music in its cosmological and theological aspects, correspond-
18 Ibid. 1, p. 32.

19 Ibid. 1, p. $4.

20 Ibid. 1, p. 19.
21 Ibid. 1, pp. 49-5

. Scc note to Book 2 p. 226, for discussion of mean-
ing of ‘antithetical.’ In any case, Aristides ‘seems here to consider
thythmn as only concerned with the ratio of arsis and thesis. Strong
and weak as affects of the collated time of rhythm apparently belong
to meter rather than to rhythm,

ON MUSIC 161

ing to the last book of Aristides and to the well known tradition
of the Timaeus. The six books which were never completed
would have dealt with harmony. All this is perfectly obvious
and perfectly usual. It is, therefore, a grave mistake to accuse
Augustine, along with Plato, of being unfortunately ignorant
of musical sensibility and of the theory of it so highly de-
veloped in the nineteenth century. It is obvious that, in the
case of both, the emphasis on music as a liberal art and
science is the result of their being so well aware of the dangers
of musical sensibility and of the consequent disorders arising
from the irresponsible independence of music as a fine art.
The mathematical theory of music has had a long and fruit-
ful career, taking in such names as Ptolemy and Kepler; it
has no apologies to make. The remarks of Laloy and Marrou
and others like them on this subject, therefore, are quite be-
side the point.

If Augustine’s treatise as a whole is well within the tradition,
so also are the details of his treatment of rhythm and meter.
The emphasis is decidedly on rhythm in the meaning of Aris-
tides, and meter in any important sense is almost wholly
ignored, For Augustine, there are two principles of rhythm
which cannot be violated: the rhythmical feet must be equal
with respect to the number of primary times, and the ratio of
arsis and thesis within the rhythmical foot must be kept con-
stant. The metrical foot, then, is entirely subservient to these
two rhythmical principles and no deviation seems to be al-
lowed; this subservience goes so far as to allow the complete
dissolution of the molossus into its primary times for the sake of
rhythm. There is no mention in Augustine of the rhythmical
modulation found in Aristides, and, indeed, to some com-
mentators trained in the tradition of certain Latin gramma-
rians, it has seemed that Augustine tortures one line of poetry
after another to fit them into the mold of his rhythmical
162 SAINT AUGUSTINE

principles. Every pleasing appearance must be explained’ by
them. And Augustine pushes his investigations much like a
physicist who must explain every phenomenon in the light
of his fundamental premises. The use of the musical rest is
one of his favorite devices in accomplishing this. But the
theory of the musical rest, without any application, appears in
Aristides’ treatise, and there is evidence that the use was quite
in tradition, although in a tradition different from that of
the Latin grammarians such as Diomedes and Victorinus."
Yet the severity of Augustine's doctrine is remarkable, and,
as we suggest later in our notes, seems to be the result of a
deliberate attempt to restore a purely musical science of
rhythmics against the usages of a whole tribe of grammarians
and rhetoricians.

Given the Pythagorean themes of Augustine's dialectic in
Book VI, this is not a surprising attempt. If it is also remem-
bered that Augustine stands at the end of the classical
quantitative metric and at the beginning of the stress or
accentual metric, there may even be more point to it. In the
quantitative metric, the thing rhythmed is informed by the
rhythm through the pattern of primary times given by the
syllables; in the stress metric it is the stress that determines
the pattern primarily and the syllables only determine it sec-
ondarily. Since the stress is associated with each word as a
whole, the stress metric gives more prominence to the word
as a unit than does the quantitative metric. In the confused
situation of metrics, the Augustinian theory, although it takes
as its base the quantitative syllable with many protests at its
mere conventionality, arrives at a pure musical rhythmics
of whole-number ratios which can well apply to any system

22 The justification for these general remarks will be found in the notes
to the treatise itself,
ON MUSIC 163

of metrics whatever. It stands above the metrical conflict of
the period, therefore, and is, as Augustine continually points
out, a purely musical discipline and not a grammatical one.
Questions of stress, of the relative position of arsis and thesis,
and even of syllabic quantity, are simply modes by which
rhythm is incarnated in the rhythmed; they are not of its
essence. And so Augustine gives the very innocuous definition
of meter as the measuring off of rhythms, but a definition
wholly traditional and mentioned by Aristides Quintilianus.

At first glance, we are tempted to consider the great concern
of Augustine with these details of rhythm and meter as some-
thing of a tragedy. If we think of the comparable math-
ematical concerns of Plato, those of Augustine seem trivial,
unworthy vehicles of the weighty dialectical truths they are
supposed to carry. We think of Augustine as the victim of a
period which had lost the profound mathematical insight of
the great Greek age and could offer little for those living in it
to reason on. There was not much a deep and sensitive soul
could avail itself of, to escape the all-pervading rhetoric. But
such a view is, perhaps, too simple, true in part though it
may be.

For anyone reading the treatise On Music and then Books
X and XI of the Confessions, the dovetailing of the themes
is striking. Augustine remains a rhetorician. But, from the
frivolous rhetorician that he was before his conversion, he
becomes the real rhetorician, he who wins the outer to the
inner man, the world to number, and the soul to its Redemp-
tion. Again and again he returns to the example of the
syllable as a strange arbitrary quantum of time and of motion.
And, properly, the locus of this rhetorical problem is the
problem of motion and time. For, if time is an irreversible
succession of before and after, then there is no Redemption
possible; what has been, has been. And if mind and sense
164 SAINT AUGUSTINE

are to have a common point, it must be in memory and time,
where motion as pure passage is caught in its numerableness
and unchangingness, and number in its immobility is incar-
nate in change.

The problem of motion and time is also the focus for the
problem of creation. Each moment of time, appearing ever
as something new from a relative non-being, is symbolic of
creation ex nihilo. If one is hypnotized as Aristotle by the
successiveness of time, then no creation ex nihilo seems pos-
sible. But Plato sees not only this aspect, but the aspect of
‘jump,’ of the discontinuous and abrupt instant, indicative of
the radical contingency of all temporal appearance. So, too,
Augustine is fascinated by these instants which are and are
not, and which are really understood only in so far as they
are held distinct and together in the memory, just as the
creation is only a whole and its parts as seen in Christ.

Memory, in the Confessions, is a principle of intellectual
mediation like Christ. Ἵ hrough it the past is and the future
is, and, therefore, through it repentance and salvation are
possible. It is a cry of intellectual triumph, the cry of Augus-
tine, ‘In te, anime meus, tempora metior.’ For now necessity
is overruled and the struggle with the implacable is won,
not by denying nor escaping it, but by mediation and
comprehension.

This is the train of thought begun in the treatise On Music,
where Augustine finds his attention strained to number at
the point where body meets soul and action meets passion, in
the rhythmical song and speech of man.
ON MUSIC 165

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

Texts of the treatise:
S. Augustinus, De musica, ed. J. P. Migne, Patrologiae cursus com-
pletus: Series Latina 82 (Paris 1877).
——-, editio Parisina altera (Paris 1836) .

Translations: -
C. J. Perl, Augustins Musik. “Erste deutsche Übertragung. (Strass-
burg 1937).
R. Cardamone, S. Agostino Della musica libri sei traduti ed annotati
(Firenze 1878).

Secondary works:

F. Amerio, Ἢ "De musica" di S. Agostino,’ Didaskaleion, Nuova
serie 8 (1929) 1-196.

Aristides Quintilianus, De musica libiri ΠῚ (in Meibom, Antiquae
musicae auctores septem, Amsterdam 1652); also ed. A. Jahn
(Berlin 1882).

Aristoxenus, Harmonica, ed. H. Macran (Oxford 1902).

J. Bartels, Aristoxeni Elementorum. Rhylhmicorum | Fragmentum

(Bonn 1854).
H. Edelstein, Die Musikanschauung Augustins (Ohlau in Schesien
1929) .

E. Graf, Rhythmus und Metrum (Marburg 1891) .

N. Hoffman, Philosophische Interpretationen de Arte Musica (Marl-
burg 1931).

J. Huré, St. Augustin, musicien (Paris 1924).

L. Laloy, Aristoxéne de Tarente et la musique de l'antiquité. (Paris
1904) .

Martianus Capella, De nuptiis Philologiae, ed. Meibom (Amsterdam
1652, as above for Aristides Quintilianus).

H. I. Marrou, St. Augustin et la fin de la culture antique (Biblio-
théque des Ecoles d'Athénes et de Rome 145, Paris 1938).

M. G. Nicolau, L'origine du ‘cursus’ rhythmique-et les débuts de l'ac-
cent d'intensité en latin (Paris 1980) .

R. Scháflke, Aristeides Quintilianus von der Musik (Berlin-Schóne-
berg 1937).

W. Scherer, ‘Des hl. Augustins 6 Bücher De musica, Kirchenmusik-
alisches Jahrbuch 22 (1909) 63-69. Not consulted.

K. Svoboda, L'Esthétique de St. Augustin et ses sources (Brno 1933).

Victorinus,4rs grammatica, ed. H. Keil, grammatici Latini 6 (Leip-
zig 1874) .

H. Vincente, Analyse du traité de métrique et de rhythmique de St.
Augustin intitulé: De musica (Paris 1849). Not consulted.
166 SAINT AUGUSTINE

H. B. Vroom, Le psaume abécédaire de St. Augustin et la poésie
latine rhythmique (J. Schrijnen [ed.], Latinitas Christianorum
primaeva 4, Nijmegen 1938).

H. Weil, Etudes de ratur. et de rhythmique grecques (Paris
1902)

K. Wenig, ‘Uber die Quellen der Schrift Augustins de Musica, Listy
Philologicke 33 (1906). Not consulted.

R. Westphal. Aristoxenus von Tarent. Melik und Rhythmik des
classischen Hellinenthums (Leipzig 1883, 1893) .

~———, Fragmente und Letrsiitze der griechischen Rhythmniker (Leip-
zig 1861).

A. Wikman, Beitráge zur Asthetik Augustins. Not consulted.

C. F. A. Williams, The Aristoxenian Theory of Musical Rhythm
(Cambridge 1911).
CONTENTS

BOOK ONE
The definition of music is given; and the species and pro-
portion of number-laden movements, things which belong

to the consideration of this discipline, are explained . 169

BOOK TWO

Syllables and metrical feet are discussed . . . . . . 205

BOOK THREE

The difference between rhythm, meter, and verse; then
rhythm is discussed separately; and next the treatise on

mele begins 6 9 5 6 0 dG Go oo {.....-
BOOK FOUR

The treatise on meter is continued. . . . . . . 260
BOOK FIVE

Verse is discussed 666 6 0 ob oo oO Pu
BOOK SIX

The mind is raised from the consideration of changeable
numbers in inferior things to unchangeable numbers in
unchangeable truth itself . . . . . . . . . 32%
ON MUSIC

BOOK ONE

The definition of music is given; and the species and
proportion of number-laden movements, things which belong
to the consideration of this discipline, are explained.

Chapter 1

(1) MASTER. What foot is ‘modus’?

DISCIPLE. A pyrrhic.

M. And it contains how many times?!

D. Two.

M. What foot is ‘bonus’?

D. The same as ‘modus.’

M. So, what is ‘bonus’ is also ‘modus.’

D. No.

M. Why are they, then, the same?

D. Because they are the same in sound, but other in
signification.

M. You say, then, the sound is the same when we say
‘modus,’ and when we say ‘bonus’.

D. I see of course they differ in the sound of the letters,
but are otherwise alike.

M. Now when we pronouce the verb ‘pone’ and the ad-
verb ‘pone,’ except for the difference in meaning, do you
perceive no difference in sound?

D. There is quite a difference.

1 The doctrine of the tempus, or prétos chrónos, is more thoroughly
examined in 22.

169
170 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. Where is the difference, since both consist of the same
times and the same letters?

D. The difference is they have the acute accent’ in dif-
ferent places.

M. Now to what art does it belong to distinguish these
things?

D. I have always heard them from grammarians, and that
is where I learnt them. But whether they are proper to this
art or taken from somewhere else, I don’t know.

M. We shall see later. But for the present I shall ask you
this. If I should strike a drum or a string at the same intensity
and speed we pronounce ‘modus’ or bonus,’ would you rec-
ognize the times to be the same or not?

D. I should.

M. Then you would call it a pyrrhic foot.

D. I should.

M. Where did you learn the name of this foot; wasn't it

from the grammarian?
D. Yes.

2 The problem of the accent is never mentioned again in this treatise.

This is probably because it is considered by Augustine as belonging
to the purely grammatical side of metrics and not properly to rhythmics
and music. As we shall see later, Augustine's definition and treatment
of meter is a purely rhythmical and musical one.

If Nicolau is right, the accent, however, played a conspicuous role

in the development of the vocal ictus as distinguished from the purelv
mechanical ictus. See his L'Origine du ‘cursus’ rythmique et les débuls
de l'accent d'intensité en latin. (Paris 1980). The fusion or confusion
of the vocal ictus and the accent will in turn radically change the
material to be rhythmet and finally establish accentual meters in
the place of quantitative meters.
The primacy of rhythm and beat and the complete subordination of
syllable and metrics are here suggested. Quite a part of this is
Augustines war on grammar. If we remember that rhythm was
treated in the discipline of grammar by Marius Victorinus, Diomedes,
and other Latin writers, and that the culture Augustine lived in was
declining under the weight of grammar and grammarians, this flight
of a rhetorician to rhythm, and to rhythm we shall see as pure number,
is not without deep significance.

t
ON MUSIC 171

M. Then the grammarian will judge concerning all such
sounds. Or rather, didn’t you learn those beats through
yourself, but the name you imposed you had heard from a
grammarian?

D. That’s it.

M. And you have ventured to transfer the name which
grammar taught you to that thing you admit does not belong
to grammar?

D. I see the measure of the times is the only reason for
imposing the name of the foot. And so, wherever I recognize
the proper measure, why shouldn't I just give it its name?
But even if other names can be imposed when sounds have
the same measure, yet they do not concern grammarians.
So, why should I bother about names when the thing itself
is clear?

M. I don't wish to, either. And yet when you see a great
many kinds of sound in which distinct measures can be
observed, and we admit these kinds are not to be attributed
to the art of grammar, don't you think there is some other
discipline which contains whatever is numerable or artful
in utterances of this sort?

D. It would seem probable.

M. What do you think its name is? For I don't believe it
is news to you that a certain omnipotence in singing is usually
granted the Muses. If I am not mistaken, this is what is called
Music.

D. And I also say it's that.

Chapter 2

(2) M. But we want to bother as little as possible about
the name. Only let us inquire, if you will, into all the power
and reason of whatever art this is,
172 SAINT AUGUSTINE

D. Let's do so by all means. For I should like very much
to know the whole of this affair.

M. Now define music.

D. I shouldn't dare to.

M. Well, you can at least test my definition?

D. YII try, if you will give it.

M. Music is the science of mensurating well [modulandi].*
Doesn't it seem so to you?

D. It might seem so, if it were clear to me what mensura-
tion [modulatio] is.

M. This word ‘to mensurate’ [modulari]—you have at no
time heard it used anywhere, except in what has to do with
singing or dancing?

D. Just so. But because I know ‘to mensurate’ [modulari]
is taken from ‘measure’ [modus], since in all things well
made measure must be. observed, and because I also know
many things in singing and dancing, however much they
charm, are very reprehensible, I want to understand fully
what this mensuration is. For almost in this one word is
contained the definition of a very great art. And certainly
we are not to study here what any singer or actor knows.

4 It is impossible to render modulari by ‘to modulate; because ‘modu-
late' in English has a technical musical meaning: it means a change
from one mode or key to another mode or key according to certain
reasonable rules. It is even used in rhythmics by Aristides to denote the
art of changing from one rhythm to another. The Greek word for
this is metabolé, which is also used in Latin. We have, therefore, used
the rather harsh and strange 'mensurate. Aside from the fact that it
fits well with ‘measure,’ its adjective 'mensurable' has a musical
connotation. See the Oxford English Dictionary. This definition appears
in Cassiodorus, Institutiones, 11,5,2 (ed. Mynors, Oxford 1937, p. 143).
In the previous chapter, Censorinus to Quintus Carellius, de Natali eius
die is mentioned as a source for musical doctrine. The same definition
is found indeed in Censorinus, de die Natali liber, 10,3 (ed. Hultsch,
Leipzig 1867, p. 16). Holzer therefore concludes it must be from the
lost works of Varro on the liberal arts. See Holzer, Varroniana (Ulm
1890) , 6, 14, 15.
ON MUSIC 173

M. Don't let this disturb you, that, as you just said, in all
things made, music included, measure must be observed,
and yet that this is called mensuration in music. For you are
aware ‘diction’ is properly restricted to the orator.

D. | am. But what has that to do with this?

M. Because when your servant, no matter how uncultured
and peasantlike he may be, replies with as much as one
word to your question, don't you admit he is saying [dicere]
something?

D. I do.

M. And therefore he is an orator?

D. No.

M. Then he hasn't used diction when he has said some-
thing, although we admit diction is derived from saying.

D. I agree. But I want to know what all this is about.

M. For you to understand that mensuration can regard
music alone, while measure, from which the word is derived,
can also be in other things. In the same way diction is
properly attributed to orators, although anyone who speaks
says something, and diction gets its name from saying.

D. Now I understand.

(3) M. Now what you said a while ago, that many things
in singing and dancing are reprehensible, and that, if we
take the word mensuration from them, the almost divine
art becomes degraded—and that you have very prudently
observed. So, let us first discuss what it is to mensurate; then
what it is to mensurate well; for that is not added to the
definition without reason. Finally, too, it shouldn't be forgot-
ten the word science has been put there. For with these three,
I believe, the definition is complete.

D. All right.

M. Now, since we admit mensuration is named from
174 SAINT AUGUSTINE

measure, you never think, do you, you have to fear the
measure’s being exceeded or not fulfilled, except in things
moving in some way or other? Or rather, if nothing move,
we can’t fear anything’s being out of measure, can we?

D. No, not at all.

M. Then, mensuration is not improperly called a certain
skill in moving, or at any rate that by which something is
made to move well. For we can't say anything moves well
unless it keeps its measure.

D. No, we can't, but, on the contrary, we have to under-
stand this mensuration in all things well done. For I see
nothing to be done, if not in moving well.

M. What if, perhaps, all these things are done by music,
although the name mensuration is more used in connection
with instruments of a certain kind, and not incorrectly? I
am sure you think the thing fashioned, whether it be of wood
or silver or some other material, is one thing, and the artist's
movement by which these things are fashioned is another.

D. Yes, they differ a great deal.

M. Now you can't say, can you, the movement is desired
for itself, and not for the sake of that which the artist wants
to be fashioned?

D. "That's evident.

M. But if he should move his limbs for no other reason
than that they should be moved gracefully and harmoniously,
we should say he was dancing and nothing more, shouldn't
we?

D. It seems so.

M. When do you think a thing is superior, and you might
say to rule, when it is desired for its own sake or for the sake
of another?

D. For its own sake, of course.

M. Begin again with what we have just said about mensu-
ON MUSIC 175

ration (for we had assumed it to be a certain skill in moving)
and see where this name ought rather to be applied: to that
movement which is free, that is, is desired for itself and
charms through itself alone, or to that which serves in some
way. For all those things are somehow servile which are not
for themselves but are referred to something else.

D. To that which is desired for itself.

M. Then it is now to be assumed the science of mensurat-
ing is the science of moving well, in such a way that the
movement is desired for itself, and for this reason charms
through itself alone.

D. That is very likely the case.

Chapter 3

(4) M. Why, then, is ‘well’ added, since there cannot
even be mensuration, unless the thing move well?

D. I don’t know, and 1 don’t know how it escaped me. For
it had been in my mind to ask this.

M. There could be no dispute at all over this expression,
so long as we dropped ‘well’ and defined music only as the
science of mensurating.

D. And there would be none now, if you would clear it
all up.

M. Music is the science of moving well. But that is because
whatever moves and keeps harmoniously the measuring of
times and intervals can already be said to move well. For
it is already pleasing, and for this reason is already properly
called mensuration. Yet it is possible for this harmony and
measuring to please when they shouldn’t. For example, if
one should sing sweetly and dance gracefully, wishing there-
by to be gay when the ocasion demanded gravity, such a
person would in no way be using harmonious mensuration
176 SAINT AUGUSTINE

well. In other words, that’ person uses ill or improperly the
motion at one time called good because of its harmony. And
so it is one thing to mensurate, and another to mensurate
well. For mensuration is thought to be proper to any singer
whatever if only he does not err in those measurings of voice
and sounds, but good mensuration to be proper to the liberal
discipline, that is, to music. Now, even if the motion itself,
because it is misplaced, does not seem to you good, even
though you admit it is harmonious in construction, yet let
us hold to our definition and keep it the same everywhere,
not to have a merely verbal battle upset us where the thing
itself is clear enough. And let us not bother whether music
be described as the science of mensurating or as the science
of mensurating well.

D. I prefer to get beyond a mere scuffle of words and to
make light of such things. After all, I don't object to this
distinction.

Chapter 4

(5) M. Finally, we must consider why the word ‘science’
is in the definition.

D. All right, for I remember the order of our discourse
demands it.

M. Tell me, then, whether the nightingale seems to mensu-
rate its voice well in the spring of the year. For its song is
both harmonious, and sweet and, unless I'm mistaken, it
fits the season.

D. It seems quite so.

M. But it isn't trained in the liberal discipline, is it?

D. No.

M. You see, then, the noun ‘science’ is indispensable to
the definition.
ON MUSIC rig)

D. I see it clearly.

M. Now tell me, then, don’t they all seem to be a kind
with the nightingale, all those which sing well under the
guidance of a certain sense, that is, do it harmoniously and
sweetly, although if they were questioned about these numbers
or intervals of high and low notes? they could not reply?

D. I think they are very much alike.

M. And what's more, aren't those who like to listen to them
without this science to be compared to beasts? For we see
elephants, bears, and many other kinds of beasts are moved
by singing, and birds themselves are charmed by their own
voices. For, with no further proper purpose, they would not
do this with such effort without some pleasure.

D. I judge so, but this reproach extends to nearly the whole
of human kind.

M. Not as much as you think. For great men, even if they
know nothing about music, either wish to be one with the
common people who are not very different from beasts and
whose number is great; and they do this very properly and
prudently. But this is not the place to discuss that. Or after
great cares in order to relax and restore the mind they very
moderately partake of some pleasure. And it is very proper

5 We have here translated intervallis acutarum  gravumque vocum by
‘intervals of high and low notes. These ave more or less technical
words im harmonics. "Interval is equivalent to the Greek word
didstema, meaning difference of pitch; and vox, in the usage of
Martianus Capella, is equivalent to the phoné of Aristoxenus and
Aristides and includes voice and the sound of instruments, covering both

the speaking voice and the singing voice, that is, the phoné synechés

and the phoné diastematiké of Aristides. See Aristoxenus, Harmonica,

1, 3. 4-5; Aristides, De Musica, 1, 7; Martianus Capella, De Nuptiis

Mercurii et philologae 1X, 182. Therefore, vox strictly should not be

translated by ‘note, which is equivalent to phthóngos, and translated

bv Martianus as sonus. There are later passages where Augustine
evidently uses sonus for sound in general. A discussion of these terms
would have belonged to the De melo which Augustine never wrote,

178 SAINT AUGUSTINE

to take it in from time to time. But to be taken in by it, even
at times, is improper and disgraceful.

(6) But how about this? Those who play on flutes or
lyres or any other instrument of this kind, they can’t be
compared to the nightingale, can they?

D. No.

M. How, then, do they differ?

D. In that I find a certain art in these instrument players,
but only nature in the nightingale.

M. That's true. But do you think it ought to be called an
art even if they do it by a sort of imitation?

D. Why not? For imitation seems to me to be so much a
part of the arts that, if it is removed, nearly all of them are
destroyed. For masters exhibit themselves to be imitated, and
this is what they call teaching.

M. But don't you think art is a sort of reason, and those
"who use art use reason? Or do you think otherwise?

D. It seems so.

M. Therefore, whoever cannot use reason does not use
art.

D. I grant that, too.

M. Do you think dumb animals, which are also called
irrational, can use reason?

D. Not at all.

M. Then, either you would be forced to say magpies,
parrots, and crows are rational, or you have been pretty
rash in calling imitation by the name of art. For we find that
these birds sing and make many sounds because of their inter-
course with human beings, and that they utter them only by
imitation. Or do you object to this?

D. I don't yet fully understand how you have reached
this conclusion and how far it invalidates my reply.

M. I have asked you whether you would say lyre-players
ON MUSIC 179

and flute-players or any other men of this sort had an art,
even if what they do in singing they do by imitation. You
have said it is an art, and you have affirmed this so true it
seems to you that, if imitation were done away with, nearly
all the arts would be destroyed. And from this it can be
concluded that anyone who does something by imitating
uses an art, although, perhaps not everyone who uses an art
acquired it by imitating. But if all imitation is art, and all
art reason, all imitation is reason. But an irrational animal
does not use reason; therefore, it does not possess an art. But
it is capable of imitation; therefore, art is not imitation.

D. I said that many arts consist in imitation. I did not call
imitation itself art.

M. And so you don’t think those arts consisting in imita-
tion consist in reason?

D. Certainly, I think they consist in both.

M. I have no objection. But where do you place science,
in reason or in imitation?

D. Also in both.

M. Then you suppose those birds endowed with reason
which you have supposed capable of imitation.

D. I do not. For I have supposed science to be in both, in
such a way that it cannot be in imitation alone.

M. Well, do you think it can be in reason alone?

D. It can.

M. Then you think art is one thing, science another. If,
then, science can be in reason alone, then art joins imitation
with reason.

D. I don't see that follows. For I did not say all arts, but
many arts, consisted in both reason and imitation together.

M. Well, will you also call that science which consists in
these two together, or will you attribute only the reasonable
part to it?
180 SAINT AUGUSTINE

D. What is to prevent me from calling it science when
imitation is joined with reason?

(7) M. Since now we are concerned with the cither-
player and the flute-player, that is to say with musical things,
I want you to tell me whether, when such people do some-
thing by imitation, that is to be attributed to the body, that
is, to a kind of bodily obedience.

D. I think it ought to be attributed to both the mind and
the body, although the word which you used, ‘bodily obe-
dience,’ was properly enough introduced by you. For it can
only obey the mind.

M. I see you are very careful about not wishing to at-
tribute imitation to the body alone. But you won’t deny
science belongs to the mind alone, will you?

D. Who would deny that.

M. Then you certainly would not allow anyone to at-
tribute the science of the sounds of strings and pipes to both
reason and imitation together. For, as you admitted, there is
no imitation without a body; but you have also said science
is of the mind only.

D. I admit this conclusion follows from the premises I
granted you. But what of it? For the piper will have science
in his mind. And when he happens to be imitating, which
I admitted impossible without a body, this act of his does not
destroy what is embraced by the mind.

M. No, it doesn’t. Nor do I affirm that all those who handle
such instruments lack science, but I say they do not all have
science. For we are considering this question for the following
purpose: to understand, if we can, how correct it is to in-
clude science in the definition of music. And if all pipers,
flute-players, and others of this kind have science, then I
ON MUSIC 181

think there is no more degraded and abject discipline than
this one.

(8) M. But be as attentive as possible, so that what we
have been strenuously looking for may appear. For you have
already granted me that science lives only in the mind.

D. And why shouldn't I?

M. Further, do you attribute the sense of hearing to the
mind, to the body, or to both?

D. To both.

M. And memory?

D. To the mind, I think. For if we perceive by the senses
something we commit to memory, that is no reason to think
we must consider memory to be in the body.

M. This happens to be a great question, and one not
proper to this discussion. But I believe you can't deny—and
that is enough for the subject in hand—that beasts have
memory. For swallows come back to their nests the next year,
and it is very truly said of goats: ‘And even goats remember-
ing return to their sheds.* And a dog is said to have rec-
ognized the hero, his master, already forgotten by his men.
And we can bring up many cases, if we wished to prove
our claim.

D. I don't deny it, and I am anxiously awaiting what help
this will give you.

M. Why this, of course, that whoever attributes science to
the mind alone refuses it to all irrational living things, and
places it neither in sense nor memory, but in the intellect
alone. For sense is not without body, and both sense and
memory exist in beasts.

D. And I am still waiting to see how this will help you.

M. In this way. That all who follow sense and what is

6 Vergil, Georgics 8.316.
182 SAINT AUGUSTINE

pleasing in it commit to memory, and in this way, by mov-
ing their body, acquire a certain power of imitation; and
that they do not have science even if they seem to do many
things cleverly and skillfully unless they possess in the purity
and truth of the intellect the very thing they profess or exhibit.
And if reason demonstrate these comedians to be just people,
there is no reason, I believe, why you should hesitate to
deny them science, and, therefore, music which is the science
of mensurating.
D. Explain this. Let's see about it.

(9) M.I believe you attribute the greater or less mobility
of the fingers not to science but to practice, don't you?

D. Why do you believe so?

M. Because just now you attributed science to the mind
alone. But, although in this case the mind commands, you
see the act belongs to the body.

D. But, since the knowing mind commands this of the body,
I think the act ought to be attributed to the mind rather
than the servile members.

M. But, don't you think it is possible for one person to
surpass another in science, even though the other person
move his fingers much more easily and readily?

D. I do.

M. But, if the rapid and readier motion of the fingers
were to be attributed to science, the more science anyone had
the more he would excel in the rapidity of the motion.

D. I concede that.

M. Consider this, too. For I suppose you have sometimes
noticed how artisans or craftsmen of this sort keep striking the
same place with an axe or hatchet and how the blow is only
carried where the mind intends it, and how, when we try
and can't do likewise, they often ridicule us.
ON MUSIC 183

D. It’s as you say.

M. Then, since we can’t do it, do you think we do not
know what ought to be struck or how much ought to be cut?

D. Often, we don’t know, often we do.

M. Suppose, then, someone who knows everything artisans
ought to do and knows it perfectly, and yet is less able than
they in practice; who nevertheless prescribes for these same
people who work with such ease, more wisely than they
could for themselves. Would you deny that came from
practice?

D. I shouldn't.

M. Then, not only the speed and facility of moving but
also the manner itself of the motion is to be attributed to
practice rather than science. For, if it were otherwise, the
cleverer one were the better he would use his hands. Now,
we can translate this in terms of pipes or citherns, in order
not to think that what fingers and joints do in such cases,
because it is difficult for us, is done by science and meditation
rather than by practice and diligent imitation.

D. I have to give in. For I am always hearing how even
doctors, very learned men, in the matter of amputating or
binding limbs, are often surpassed by less clever men in their
use of the hand or knife. And this kind of curing they call
surgery. The word itself signifies a certain operative habit
of curing, developed in the hands. But pass on to other
things, and let's finish up this question of ours.

Chapter 5

(10) M. I believe it remains for us to find, if we can,
the arts which please us in the practical mastery they give
our hands, and which do not derive immediately from science,
but from sense and memory. For of course you can tell me
184 SAINT AUGUSTINE

that it is possible for there to be science without practice, and
very frequently greater science than in those who excel in
practice; but that on the other hand they can’t even acquire
practice without science.

D. Go on, for it is clear that ought to be the case.

M. Have you never listened carefully to actors of this sort?

D. More perhaps than I should wish.

M. How do you explain the fact that an ignorant crowd
hisses off a flute-player letting out futile sounds, and on the
other hand applauds one who sings well, and finally that the
more agreeably one sings the more fully and intensely it is
moved? For it isn’t possible to believe the crowd does all
this by the art of music, is it?

D. No.

M. How then?

D. I think it is dane by nature giving everyone a sense of
hearing by which such things are judged.

M. You are right. But now consider this, too, whether
the flute-player himself is also endowed with this sense. And
if it is so, he can, by following his own judgment, move his
fingers when he blows on the flute, and can note and com-
mit to memory what he decides sounds well enough; and by
repeating it he can accustom his fingers to being carried
about without hesitation or error, whether he gets from
another what he plays or whether he finds it himself, led on
and abetted as he is by the nature we spoke of. And so, when
memory follows sense, and the joints, already subdued and
prepared by practice, follow memory, the player sings as
he wishes, the better and more easily the more he excels in
all those things which reason just now taught us we havc
in common with the beasts: that is, the desire of imitating,
sense, and memory. Have vou any objections to that?

D. No, I haven't. Now I want to know what kind of disci-
ON MUSIC 185

pline this is I see so nicely appropriated by knowledge be-
longing to the lowest animals.

Chapter 6

(11) M. We haven't yet done enough. And I shall
not allow us to pass to its explanation unless we have already
agreed how actors without this science can satisfy the popular
ear. And it also will have been established that actors can
in no way be students of, and learned in, music.

D. It will be marvelous if you do this.

M. That is easy, but you must be more attentive.

D. Never that I know have I been even a little careless
in listening from the very beginning of this dialogue. But
now, I admit, you have made me more intent.

M. I am grateful, although you more or less suit yourself.
But, tell me whether you think a man who wishes to sell
a gold piece for a fair price, and judge it to be worth ten
cents knows what it is.

D. Well, who would think so?

M. Then tell me, which is to be considered dearer, what
is contained in our intellect or what is accidentally attributed
to us by the judgment of an ignorant people?

D. No one doubts the first is far above all others, even
those things which are not to be thought ours.

M. And so you don't deny, do you, all science is contained
in the intellect?

D. Who does?

M. And, therefore, music is in the intellect.

D. That seems to follow from its definition.

M. Well then, don't the people's applause and all those
theatrical rewards seem to you to be of the kind which is at-
186 SAINT AUGUSTINE

tributed to the power of chance and the judgment of the
ignorant?

D. I don't suppose anything is more fortuitous and liable
to chance, or subject to the domination and pleasure of the
many, than these things are.

M. Would actors, then, sell their songs for this price, if
they knew music?

D. I am not a little shaken by this conclusion, but I can’t
gainsay it. For it doesn’t seem that the seller of the gold piece
ought to be compared with the actor. For when he accepts
applause or when money is given him, he doesn’t give up
his science, if he chanced to have any, to please the people
with. But, heavier with pennies and happier with the praise
of men, he returns home with the same discipline entire and
intact. But he would be a fool if he despised these advan-
tages. For, if he hadn’t gotten them, he would be much
poorer and more obscure; having gotten them, he is no less
skilled.

(12) M. Let's see if we can get what we want in this
way. l'or I suppose you think that for the sake of which we
do a thing is much more important than the thing we do.

D. That's evident.

M. Then he who sings or who is learning to sing for no other
reason than to be praised by many or some other man, doesn't
he judge the praise to be better than the song?

D. It does seem so.

M. And he who judges wrongly about a thing, does he
seem to you to know it?

D. Certainly not, unless he has somehow been bribed.

M. And so he who really thinks something inferior to be
superior is, no doubt, lacking in the science of it.

D. 'That's so.
ON MUSIC 187

M. Therefore, when you have persuaded me or proved to
me that any actor, if he has any talent, neither has developed
it nor does he exhibit it to please the people for gain or fame,
then I shall concede it is possible both to possess the science
of music and to be an actor. But if it is véry likely all actors
conceive the end of their profession in terms of money and
glory, then we must admit either that actors do not know
music or one is right in seeking other people’s praise or some
chance gain rather than his own understanding.

D. I see that in conceding the other things, I must also
accept these. For I don’t believe there is any way of finding
a man on the stage who loves his art for itself, and not for
outside advantages. For it is hard to find one even from a
school of higher learning. Yet if one exists or should exist,
liberal artists are not for that reason to be despised; so why
isn’t it possible that actors ought sometimes to be honored.
And then explain, if you will, this great discipline which
now can’t seem to me so degraded as you make out.

Chapter 7

(13) M. I shall do so; or rather you will do so. For all
I shall do is question you. And by your answers you will
explain all of what you now seem to be after, without know-
ing it. And now tell me whether anyone can run both fast
and for a long time.

D. It is possible.

M. How about both slow and fast?

D. By no means.

M. Then 'for a long time' signifies something different
from ‘slow.’

D. Quite different.
188 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. Again, tell me what you think is the contrary of ‘long-
ness of time,’ just as ‘speed’ is the contrary of ‘slowness.’

D. No usual word occurs to me. And I find nothing I
may oppose to ‘of a long duration’ except ‘not of long dura-
tion, so that the usual contrary of ‘for a long time’ is ‘not
for a long time.’ Because if I didn’t wish to say ‘fast’ and said
*not slow' instead, there would be no difference in meaning.

M. That’s so. For it doesn't affect the truth any when we
speak this way. And as for me, if this word exists you say
hasn't occured to you, then either I don't know it or at present
it doesn't come to my mind. And so let's go on, calling con-
traries each of the pairs, ‘for a long time’ and ‘not for a
long time,’ ‘slow’ and ‘fast.’ And first, if you will, let’s dis-
cuss ‘of long duration’ and ‘not of long duration.’

D. Very well.

Chapter 8

(14) M. Now it is clear what is said to be done
for a long time [diu] is done over a long period of time [per
longum tempus], but what is said to be done not for a long
time [non diu] is done over a short period of time [per breve
tempus].

D. That’s clear.

M. For example, doesn’t a movement accomplished in
two hours have twice the time of that accomplished in one
hour?

D. Who would doubt it?

M. Therefore, what we call ‘of long duration’ or ‘not of
long duration’ is capable of such measurements and numbers
that one motion is to another as two to one; that is, that
one has twice as much as the other. And again that one
movement is to another as two to three; that is, that one has
ON MUSIC 189

three parts of time to the other’s two. And so it is possible
to run through the rest of the numbers in a way that avoids
indefinite and indeterminate spaces, and relates any two
movements by some number. Either by the same number,
as one to one, two to two, three to three, four to four; or
not by same, as one to two, two to three, three to four, or
one to three, two to six, and whatever measurements any-
thing is capable of.

D. I want to get this point of yours more clearly.

M. Return, then, to the hours, and apply to each case what
I thought sufficiently explained, since I explained it for one
hour and for two. For certainly you don’t deny the possibility
of a movement of one hour, or another of two.

D. That’s true.

M. Well, don’t you admit the possibility of two-hour move-
ment, and another of three?

D. I do.

M. And one of three hours, and another of four, again
one of one hour and another of three, or one of two hours
and another of six; isn't that clear?

D. It is.

M. Then why isn't the rest clear? For I said this same
thing when I said two movements could be related by some
number as one to two, two to three, three to four, one to
three, two to six, and any others you wish to enumerate. For
when you know these, you can follow through with the
others, either seven to ten or five to eight and anything else
consisting of two movements having parts so measured with
respect to one another they can be described as so much to
so much, either with equal numbers or with one larger and
one smaller.

D. Now I understand, and I admit its possibility.
190 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 9

(15) M. You understand this, too, I believe, that all
measure and limit is preferred to infinity and immeasur-
ableness.

D. That is very evident.

M. Then two movements which, as I said, are related by
some numerical measurement are to be preferred to those
which are not.

D. And this is evident and logical. For there is a certain
limit and measure in numbers which connect them one with
another. And those numbers lacking this measure are not
joined together by any ratio.

MM. Then, if you will, let us call those which are com-
mensurable with one another rational, and those which are
not commensurable, irrational."

D. I am willing.

M. Now, tell me whether the agreement doesn't seem to
you greater in the case of the rational movements of those
things equal to each other than of those which are unequal?

D. Who wouldn't think so?

M. Again, of those which are unequal, aren't there some
of which we can say by what aliquot part of the greater
the greater is equal to, or exceeds, the less, as two and four
or six and eight? But others of which that cannot be said,
as in the numbers three and ten or four and eleven? You
see immediately for the first two numbers that the greater
is made equal to the less by, its half. For those I mentioned
next that the greater is in excess of the less by a fourth
part of the greater. But for the others, such as three and ten
7 These are not the irrational feet defined by Aristoxenus and Aristides

Quintilianus, but irrational movements incommensurable in the sense
of magnitude without common measure.
ON MUSIC 191

or four and eleven, we find some agreement, because at least
the parts are so related it can be said of them so many to so
many. And yet we don’t see such a relation as we saw in the
earlier ones. For it can in no way be said by what aliquot
part the greater is equal to the less or by what aliquot part
it exceeds the less. For no one would say what aliquot part
of ten three is, or what aliquot part of eleven four is. And
when I tell you to consider what part it is, I mean the exact
part, without any addition, like a half, a third, a quarter,
a fifth, a sixth, and so on; so that thirds and twenty-fourths
and such divisions are in no way added on.
D. I understand.

(16) M. Then, of these unequal rational movements,
since I have also proposed two kinds of numbers in the ex-
amples adduced, which do you think are to be preferred,
those in which the aliquot part can be given or those in
which it cannot?

D. Reason seems to force my saying those in which it is
possible to say by what aliquot part of itself the greater is
either equal to the loss or exceeds it, ought to be preferred to
those in which this is not the case.

»M. But don't you think we ought to give them names, so
that, when we have to recall them later on, we may speak
of them more casily?

D. I do.

M. Then let us call those we prefer connumerate, and
the others dinumerate, because the former not only have a
common measure one, but also have as a common measure
that part by which the greater is equal to or exceeds the
less. But the latter only have a common measure one and
do not have as a common measure the part by which the
greater equals or exceeds the less. For in the case of these it
192 SAINT AUGUSTINE

is impossible to say either how many times the greater contains
the less, or how many times both the greater and the less
contain that by which the greater exceeds the less.

D. J accept these names, and I shall try as well as I can
to remember them.

Chapter 10

(17) M. Come now, let's see what division there can
be of the connumerate numbers. For I think it is pretty clear.
For one class of the connumerate numbers is that in which
the smaller number measures the greater, that is, the greater
contains it a certain number of times, just as we said the
numbers two and four do. For we see that two is contained
twice in four, and it would be contained three times if we
compared not four, but six to two, four times if it were eight,
and five times if it were ten. The other class is that in which
the part by which the greater exceeds the less measures both,
that is, the greater and less contain it a certain number of
times, and we have already noted this in the numbers six and
eight. For the part by which the less is exceeded is two and
that, you see, is contained four times in eight, three times in
six. And so let us also mark out and designate with names
the movements we are now talking about, and the numbers
which reveal what we want to know about these movements.
For I believe the distinction is already apparent. And so, if
you will, those in which the greater is a multiple of the less
are called complicate; the others sesquate, a name already
long in use. For that is called ‘sesque’ in which two numbers
have such a ratio to each other that by whatever aliquot part
of itself the greater exceeds the less, so many parts does it
contain with respect to the less. For if it is three to two, the
greater exceeds the less by a third part of itself; if four to
three, by a fourth; if five to four, by a fifth, and so on. And
ON MUSIC 193

we have the same kind of ratio also in the case of six to four,
eight to six, ten to eight; from these we can find this ratio in
the larger numbers which follow. But I should find it hard
to’ tell you the origin of this name, unless perhaps ‘sesque’
is said for ‘se absque’ or ‘absque se’ [from itself], because in
the case of five to four the greater minus [absque] a fifth of
itself is the same as the less. And what is your opinion of all
this?

D. Why, the ratio of measurements and numbers seems
very correct to me. And the names you have given seem to
be suitable for remembering the things we have understood.
And the origin of the name you just explained to me is
not absurd, although it may not be the one followed by the
person starting the name.

Chapter 11

(18) M. I approve and accept your judgment. But
do you see that all such rational motions, that is, those in
some relation of numerical measure to each other can go
on through numbers to infinity, unless some ratio should
again delimit them and keep forcing them over and over
again into a measure and form? For to speak of the equal
pairs first: one to one, two to two, three to three, four to
four, and if I follow through, what will be the end, since
number has no end? For such is the power of number that
every number named is finite, and not named is infinite.
And what happens in the case of equal pairs also happens,
as you see, in the case of unequal pairs, either complicate
or sesquate or connumerate or dinumerate. For if you take
one to two, and wish to continue with multiples by saying
one to three, one to four, one to five, and so on, there will
be no end. Or if only the double, as one to two, two to four,
194 SAINT AUGUSTINE

four to eight, eight to sixteen, and so forth, here also there
will be no end. And so, if you want to continue with only
the triple, or whatever else you wish, they will go on to infinity.
And this is true also of the sesquate. For when we say two
to three, three to four, four to five, you see nothing keeps us
from going on, for there is no limit. Or if you wish to pro-
ceed in the same class in this way, two to three, four to six,
six to nine, eight to twelve, ten to fifteen, and so on. And
so, either in this class of numbers or in all the others, no limit
appears. And there is no need now to speak of the dinumerate
numbers, since anyone can understand from what has been
said that their continual recurrence allows no limit. Doesn’t
this seem true to you?

(19) D. What could be truer? But I am now waiting
anxiously to learn about the ratio which forces such an infinity
back into some measure, and prescribes a form it may not
exceed.

M. You will find you already know this, too, as well as the
other things, when you answer my questions right. For, since
we are discussing numerically ordered movements, I wonder
whether we first should not consider numbers themselves,
and decide that whatever sure and fixed laws numbers make
manifest are to be looked for and apprehended in the move-
ments.

D. 1 certainly agree. I think nothing could be more orderly
than that.

M. Then, if you will, let us start considering numbers
from the very beginning and see, as far as we can grasp such
things with the mind's strength we have, what the reason*
8 There is a continuous play on the Latin word ratio, which means both

ratio and reason. This intentional ambiguity runs through the whole

treatise. Lógos in Greek gives same ambiguity. Since ratio or lógos is
defined by Euclid as ‘a certain relation according to multiplicability

ON MUSIC 195

is that, although as we have said numbers progress to infinity,
men have made certain articulations in counting by which
they return again and again to one, the beginning or principle
of numbers. For, in counting, we progress from one to ten,
and from there we return to one. And if you wish to follow
through with the intervals of ten, so that you go on with ten,
twenty, thirty, forty, then the progression is to a hundred.
If with intervals of a hundred, one hundred, two hundred,
three hundred, four hundred, the articulation by which you
return is at a thousand. Now why go farther? You certainly
see the articulation I mean, whose first rule is given by the
number ten. For, as ten contains one ten times, so a hundred
contains the same ten ten times, and thousand contains a hun-
dred ten times. And so you can go as far as you wish in these
articulations, in a way predetermined by the number ten.
Is there any thing in these matters you don't understand?
D. It is all very clear and true.

Chapter 12

(20) M. Then let us examine as diligently as we can
what the reason is for there being a progression from one
to ten and thence a return to one again. And next I ask you
if what we call the beginning or principle can be a beginning
at all unless it is the beginning of something.

D. Not at all.

M. Likewise, what we call the end, can it be an end, unless
it is the end of something?

D. It can't either.

M. Well, you don't think you can go from the beginning
to the end without going through the middle?

between magnitudes of the same kind; it is obvious in what dialectical

direction and toward what doctrine this intentional ambiguity directs
us.
196 SAINT AUGUSTINE

D. I don't think you can.

M. Then, for something to be a whole, it must consist of
a beginning, middle, and end.

D. It seems so.

M. Now tell me, then, in what number do you think a
beginning, middle, and end are contained.

D. I think you want me to say the number three, for three
is one of those you are looking for.

M. You think right. And so you see there is a certain per-
fection in three because it is a whole: it has a beginning,
middle, and end.

D. I see it clearly.

M. And don't we learn from boyhood every number is
either even or odd?

D. You are right.

M. Recollect, then, and tell me which we usually call even
and which odd.

D. That which can be divided into two equal parts is
called even; but which cannot, odd.

(21) M. You have it. Now, since three is the first whole
odd number, and consist of a beginning, middle, and end,
then doesn't an even number have to be whole and perfect,’
too, so that it also has a beginning, middle, and end?

D. It certainly must.

M. But this number, whichever it is, cannot have an in-
divisible middle like the odd one. For if it did, it could not
be divided into two equal parts, for that, we said, was the
property of an even number. Now, one is an indivisible mid-
dle; two is a divisible middle. But the middle in numbers
is that from which both sides are equal to each other. Has

9 Not perfect in the technical sense of a number which is the sum of
its different factors.
ON MUSIC 197

anything been put obscurely, and do you find it hard to
follow?

D. On the contrary, this, too, is all very clear to me, and
when I look for a whole even number, I first strike the num-
ber four. For how can the three things by which a number is
whole, that is, beginning, middle, and end, be found in the
number two?

M. You have answered the very thing I wished you to,
and reason has forced you to. And now repeat the discussion
beginning with the number one itself, and think. Then you
will see immediately one has no middle and end, because
there is only a beginning, or rather it is a beginning because it
lacks a middle and end.

D. That's clear.

M. What, then, shall we say of two? We can't find a begin-
ning and middle both in it, can we, since there can be no
middle where there's no end? Nor a beginning and end both,
since nothing can attain its end except through a middle?

D. Reason forces my admission, and I am very uncertain
what to reply.

M. Be careful this number isn't also a beginning of num-
bers. For if it lacks a middle and end, as you have said reason
forces us to admit, then there is nothing else for it to be but a
beginning, is there? Or do you hesitate to set up two
beginnings?

D. I hesitate very decidedly.

M. You would be right, if the two beginnings were made
opposed to each other. But in this case the second beginning
is from the first, so that the first is from none, but the second
is from the first. For one and one are two, and so they are
both beginnings in such a way that all numbers are really
from one. But because they are made by combination and
198 SAINT AUGUSTINE

addition, and the origin of combination and addition is rightly
attributed to two, therefore it is this first beginning from
which [a quo], but the second through which [per quod],
all numbers are found to be. Or have you objections to the
things you are discussing.

D. I have none. And I ponder them with admiration, even
though I am answering them myself under your questioning.

(22) M. Such things are more subtly and abstrusely ex-
amined in the discipline which concerns numbers. But here
let us return as quickly as we can to the task in hand. And so,
I ask, what does two added to one make?

D. Three.

M. So the two beginnings of numbers added together make
the whole and perfect number.

D. So it is.

M. And in counting, what number do we place after two?

D. The same three.

M. And so the same number made out of one and two is
placed after both of them as regards order, in such a way no
other can be interposed.

D. So I see.

M. But now you must also see this can happen to none of
the other numbers, the fact that, when you have singled out
any two next to each other in the order of counting, the one
immediately following them should be made up of these
two.

D. I see that, too. For two and three, which are adjoining
numbers, added together make five. And not five, but four,
immediately follows them. Again, three and four make seven,
but five and six have a place between four and seven. And
the farther I should want to go, the more there are in between.

M. Therefore, this great harmony is in the first three
ON MUSIC 199

numbers. For we say one and two, and three, and nothing
can be put between. But one and two themselves are three.

D. It is a great one certainly.

M. And have you no consideration for the fact that this har-
mony tends to a greater unity the more compressed and the
more closely connected it is, and the more it makes a one
from many.

D. On the contrary, the greatest consideration. And I
don’t know why, but I admire and love this unity you
commend.

M. I very much approve. But certainly any conjunction
and connection of things most definitely make something one
when the means agree with the extremes, and the extremes
with the means.

D. That certainly must be so.

(23) M. And so we must be careful to find it in this
relation. For when we say one, two, three, isn’t two exceeded
by three as one is exceeded by two?

D. That’s very true.

M. Well now, tell me, in this ordered set’? how many times
have I named one?

D. Once.

M. How many times three?

D. Once.

M. How many times two?

D. Twice.

M. Then once, and twice, and once, how many is that
altogether?

D. Four times.

M. Then the number four rightly follows these three; to

10 We use ‘ordered set’ advisedly as a term from modern point-set
theory, although there the term is used with a view to infinite sets.
200 SAINT AUGUSTINE

it in fact is attributed this ordering by proportion. And it is
now time you learn to know how important this thing is,
because the unity you love can be effected in ordered things
by that alone whose name in Greek is analogia and which
some of our writers have called proportion. And we'll use this
name, if you will, for, unless necessary, I should not like to
bring a Greek word over into Latin speech.

D. I am quite willing. But go on with your story.

M. I shall. For we shall try and know more thoroughly by
its place in this discipline what proportion is and how great
is its authority in things. And the more advanced you are in
learning, the better you will know its nature and power. But
you see certainly, and that is enough for the present, that
those three numbers whose harmony you were wondering
at could only have been brought together in the same relation
by the number four. And therefore, to the extent you under-
stand, it has by rule obtained its own immediate succession
to the other three to be joined with them in that closer
harmony. So that now, not one, two, three only, but one,
two, three, four is the most closely connected progression of
numbers.

D. I entirely agree.

(24) M. But consider these further characteristics, lest
you think the number four has nothing proper all other num-
bers lack, and nothing adequate to this relation I speak of,
for making the interval from one to four itself a determinate
number and the most beautiful art of progression. We agreed
a while back something became most one when the means
agreed with the extremes and the extremes with the means.

D. That's so.

M. Now, when we order one, two, three, tell me which
are the extremes, and which the mean.
ON MUSIC 201

D. One and three seem to be the extremes, and two the
mean.

M. Tell me now, one and three make what?

D. Four.

M. Well, two, the lone middle number, can’t be joined
with anything but itself, can it? And so tell me now what
twice two makes.

D. Four.

M. So then, the mean agrees with the extremes and the
extremes with the mean. And, therefore, just as there is a
certain virtue in three in that it is placed in order after one
and two, while consisting of one and two, so there is a certain
virtue in four in that it falls in counting after one, two, and
three, while consisting of one and three, or twice two. And
this agreement of the extremes with the mean and of the
mean with the extremes is by proportion which in Greek is
called analogia. Now say, have you understood this?

D. I have.

(25) M. Try and see whether the property we attributed
to the number four can be found in other numbers or not.

D. I shall. For if we fix upon two, three, four, the extremes
added together make six, and the mean added to itself also
makes six; yet not six, but five, is the number immediately
following. Again I take three, four, and five. The extremes
make eight, as also twice the mean. But between five and
eight I find no longer one number but two, namely six and
seven. And in the case of this ratio the farther I progress
the greater these intervals become.

M. I see you have understood and know thoroughly what
has been said. But now, not to delay, you certainly see that
from one to four is the most complete progression, either
from the point of view of odd and even numbers, since three
202 SAINT AUGUSTINE

is the first whole odd number and four the first whole even
(this subject was treated a while ago). Or because one and
two are the beginnings and seeds, as it were, of numbers,
three is made from; and this accounts for three numbers.
And when they are brought together by proportion, the
number four appears and comes to be, and is joined to them
by rule, to become the final number of the measured progres-
sion we seek.
D. I understand.

(26) Μ. Very well. But do you remember now what we
had begun to look for? I believe it had been proposed we
should find out, if we could, why, when definite articulations
for counting had been established in the infinity of numbers,
the first articulation should be at ten as the greatest. In
other words, why those we count, having gone from one to
ten, should return to one again.

D. I remember clearly it was for this we made our long
digression, but I don't see what we have accomplished in
the way of solving the problem. Unless all our reasoning has
led to the conclusion the progression to ten is not a fixed and
measured one, but the progression to four is. :

M. But don't you see? What is the sum of one, two, three,
and four?

D. Y see now. I see and marvel at it all, and I admit the
question which arose has now been solved. For one, two,
three, and four together are ten.

M. And so it is fitting these first four numbers and the
series of them and their relations be given more honor than
any other numbers.
ON MUSIC 203

Chapter 13

(27) M. But it is time to return to the treatment
and discussion of the movements properly attributed to this
discipline, for whose sake we have considered with regard
to numbers, plainly from another discipline, such things as
seemed sufficient for the business in hand. Now, as aids to
understanding, we took such movements in hour-intervals
as reason showed to be related by some numerical measure.
And so I ask you, supposing some one should run for an
hour, then another for two hours, could you tell, without
looking at a sun-dial or water-clock, or any time-piece of
this sort, that one of these movements was single, the other
double? And not being able to tell, would you nevertheless
be delighted by the harmony and pleasurably affected?

D. I certainly could not.

M. And suppose an instrument struck in rhythm, with one
sound a time's length and the next double repeatedly and
connectedly, to make what are called iambic feet,!! and sup-
pose someone dancing to it moving his limbs in time. Then
could you not give the time's measure, explain the move-
ment's intervals alternating as one to two, either in the beats
heard or the dancing seen? Or if you could not tell the num-
bers in its measure, wouldn't you at least delight in the rhythm
you sense?

D. It is as you say. For those who know these numbers
and discern them in the beats and dancing easily identify
them. And those who don't know them and can't identify
them admit, nevertheless, they get a certain pleasure from
them.

11 This is the rhythmical foot, and the times here spoken of could
well be, in the language of the school of Aristoxenus, chrónoi podikoi.

This will be explained in greater detail in the next Book, which
formally deals with the metrical foot.
204 SAINT AUGUSTINE

(28) M. Now, although all well measured movements
admittedly belong to the rationale of this discipline, if indeed
it is the science of mensurating well, and especially those not
referred to any thing else but keeping within themselves
their end of ornament and delight, yet even in proper ratios
these movements, as you just rightly said under my question-
ing, cannot be suited to our senses when accomplished in a
long space of time, an hour or more. And since music some-
how issuing forth from the most secret sanctuaries leaves
traces in our very senses or in things sensed by us, mustn’t
we follow through those traces to reach without fail, if we
can, those very places I have called sanctuaries?

D. We certainly must, and I earnestly pray we do so now.

M. Then let us not speak of those bounds of time extending
beyond the capacity of our senses, and discuss, as far as
reason goes, the short interval lengths which delight us in
singing and dancing. Or do you, perhaps, think of some
other possible way of following these traces which have
penetrated, as we said, our senses and the things we sense with
this discipline?

D. I think it can be done no other way.
BOOK TWO

Syllables and metrical feet! are discussed.

Chapter 1

(1) M. Then pay good attention and let’s make some-
thing like a second beginning to our argument. But first, say
whether you have learned well one of the things gram-
marians teach, that is, the difference between long and short
syllables, or whether you prefer, knowing them or not, that
we explore these matters as if we were altogether ignorant
of them, in order to have reason bring us to all these conclu-

1 Augustine discusses now the metrical foot as distinguished from the
rhythmical foot. In Book One the appeal has been to the rhythmical
foot without any explicit mention of it and without any technical ex-
amination of it. It is not until the last half of this present Book (2.18)
that mention is made of arsis and thesis, which are the distinctive parts
of the rhythmical foot. Aristides is more explicit in distinguishing the
two kinds of foot: "Rhythm is a system [scale] of times collated in a
certain order, and their affects we call arsis and thesis, and strong and
weak’ (op. cit. 1.20.) . . . ‘Now foot is a part of the whole rhythm
by means of which we comprehend the whole. And its parts are two:
arsis and thesis’ (op. cit. 194). So much for the rhythmical foot. As
for the metrical foot, it depends fundamentally on the rhythmical
foot, but emphasizes the rhythmizómenon or thing rhythmed as it
appears within the rhythm or conditions it. "Meters consist of feet.
For meter is a system [scale] composed of feet of unlike syllables com-
mensurable in length ... . [Some say] the essence of rhythm is in arsis
and thesis, but the essence of meter is in syllables and their unlikeness’
(op.cit. 149). Thus, the rhythmical foot with one time to the upward
beat and two to the downward beat could furnish two different metrical
feet: a short syllable followed by two shorts or a short followed by
a long. The problem of the difference which might arise from changing
the upward and downward beat and whether it is rhythmical or
metrical will come up later.

205
206 SAINT AUGUSTIN!

sions rather than having inveterate habit or the authority of
another's judgment force us.

D. Not only reason, but also an inexperience—I might as
well admit it—in matters of syllables certainly leads me to
prefer a radical beginning."

M. Well, then, tell me whether you yourself, by your own
observation, have ever noticed that some syllables are enunci-
ated very rapidly and briefly, but others more slowly and in
a longer time.

D. It is certainly true I have not been insensible of such
things.

M. But first I want you to know that the whole of that
science called grammatica Greek-wise, but Latin-wise littera-
tura, professes the conservation of historical precedent—either
that alone, as reason in its subtler moments teaches, or for
the most part, as even stupid minds concede. And so, for
example, when you say cano, or put it in verse, in such a way
as to prolong its first syllable when you pronounce it or in
such a place as to make it necessarily long, the grammarian
will censure you; he, of course, the guardian of history,
giving no other reason why this syllable should be contracted
than that those who lived before us and whose books survive

2 This passage is not just an attack on grammar and grammarians in
favor of the science of music, but it is also a recognition of a definite
state of affairs. At this time and before this, the distinction of long
and short syllables is no longer natural to the average person.
Augustine (in his Retractationes 1.20) , describes his Psalm against the
Donatist Faction as written for the common people, non aliquo
carminis genere, that is, not in quantitative meter. Vroom, in his
analysis of the Psalm, describes it as rhythmical acatalectic trochaic
tetrameter where the word-accent fails to coincide with the ictus only
at the begining of the two hemistiches, but where quantity is not
observed. Vroom supposes this to be the first case of such verses in
trochaic meter in Latin literature, since those of Commodianus which
are otherwise much lice them are hexameters. See Vroom, Le psaume
oe de St. Augustin et la poésie latine rythmique. (Nijmegen
ON MUSIC 207

and are discussed by grammarians used it as a short syllable,
not as a long one. And so, whatever prevails here, prevails
as authority. On the contrary, the reason of music, whose
province is the rational and numerical measure of sounds,
takes care only the syllable in this or that place be contracted
or prolonged according to the rationale of its measures. For,
if you should put this word where two long syllables ought to
be, and should make the first syllable, which is short, long
by pronunciation, the science of music will not for that be
outraged in the least. For those sound-rhythms have been
heard which were necessary to that number. But the gram-
marian orders its emendation and bids you put in a word
whose first syllable must be long according to the authority,
he says, of our ancestors of whose writings he is the watchdog.

Chapter 2

(2) M. Therefore, since we have undertaken to fol-
low the theory of music, even if you do not know which syl-
lables are to be shortened and which lengthened, we can
nevertheless overlook this ignorance of yours and consider
sufficient your saying you had noticed some syllables were
shorter and some longer. And so I now ask you whether the
sound of verses has ever moved you with pleasure.

D. In fact, so often I have almost never heard a verse with-
out pleasure.

M. If, then, someone, in a verse which delighted you in
hearing it, should lengthen or shorten the syllables contrary to
the rationale of the verse, you can’t enjoy it in the same way,
can you?

Ὁ. On the contrary, hearing it is offensive.

M. So there is no doubt about it, you enjoy a certain
208 SAINT AUGUSTINE

measuring out of numbers in the sound you say pleases you
and which when disturbed cannot give you that pleasure.

D. That’s evident.

M. Then tell me, in so far as it concerns the verse's sound,
what differences does it make whether I say Arma virumque
cano, Troiae qui primus ab oris or qui primis ab oris.

D. Both sound the same to me as far as measure is
concerned.

M. And that's because of my pronunciation, with a fault,
of course, grammarians call a barbarism. For ‘primus’ is made
up of a long and a short syllable. And in ‘primis’ both ought
to be long, but I shortened the last one. So your ears were
right. Therefore, we must repeatedly test to see whether,
on my pronouncing, you sense what is long and not long in
syllables, in order to have the discussion continue, with me
questioning and you replying as we began it. So I shall repeat
the same verse I committed the barbarism in, and the syllable
I shortened, not to offend your ears, I shall lengthen, as the
grammarians order. You will tell me whether the rhythm
of the verse gives your senses the same pleasure. So let me
recite this way, Arma virumque cano, Troiae qui primis ab
oris.

D. No, I can't deny I am disturbed by a sort of deformity
of sound.

M. You are quite right. For, although there was no barba-
rism, yet there was a fault both grammar and music con-
demn: grammar, because a word whose syllable is to be pro-
nounced long has been put where a syllable to be pronounced
short should be, but music only because some sound has been
lengthened where it ought to have been shortened, and the
proper time demanded by the numerical measure has not been
rendered. And so, if you now discriminated between what
the sense of hearing demands and what authority demands,
ON MUSIC 209

it follows we should see why that sense sometimes enjoys
either long or short sounds and sometimes does not. For that
is what concerns ‘for a long time’ and ‘not for a long time.’
And I am sure you remember we undertook to explain just
that.

D. I made the discrimination, I remember, and I am wait-
ing very eagerly for what follows.

Chapter 3

(3) M. Don't you think we should begin by compar-
ing syllables with each other and seeing by what numbers
they are related to each other, just as we have already done
with movements in a very long discussion? For all that sounds
is in movement, and syllables are certainly sound. Do you
deny any of these premises?

D. Not at all.

M. Therefore, when syllables are compared with each
other, movements containing numbers found by measure of
the length of time are compared with each other.

D. That’s so.

M. Then, one syllable cannot be compared with itself, can
it? For singleness escapes all comparison. Or have you some-
thing else to say about this?

D. I haven't.

M. But that one syllable to one syllable, or one to two,
or two to three and so on, you don't deny they can be
compared with each other, do you?

D. Who would?

M. And then, consider this, any short syllable you will,
pronounced in the shortest time, dying as soon as it begins,
yet occupies some interval of time and has some brief stay
of its own.
210 SAINT AUGUSTINE

D. What you say seems necessary.

M. Tell me, now, what number we begin with.

D. One, of course.

M. Then the ancients were not absurd in calling one time
a sort of minimum interval,’ proper to the short syllable. For
we go from the short to the long.

D. That's true.

M. It follows, then, you also perceive that, since as in
numbers the first progression is from one to two, so in syllables
where we clearly go from short to long, the long ought to be
double time. And therefore, if the interval the short syllable
occupies is rightly called one time, likewise the interval the
long one occupies is rightly called two times.*

D. Very rightly, for I agree reason demands it.

Chapter 4

(4) M. Now, let us consider the ordered sets them-
selves. For I want to know what ratio you think one short
syllable has to one short syllable or what these movements

3 This refers to the doctrine of the prótos chrónos, or primary time,
of Aristoxenus. The rótos chrónos is that time which can never be
divided by the rhythmizómenon, the thing rhythmed, either /éxis,
melos, or kinesis somatiké, that is, speech, melody, or bodily movement.
See fragments in Westphal, Aristoxenos von Tarent, II 79, 18-20.
Aristides gives the same doctrine: ‘Primary time is then an indivisible
and least time which is called a point. And I call that least with
respect to us which is the first [time] capable of being grasped by
sense’ (op.cit. 11.82) . It is not only relative to the thing rhythmed and
to us in general, but also from occasion to occasion, since it can be
varied by change or tempo or agogé. This quasi arbitrary and creative
act by which we make a divisible sensible thing stand for an indivisible
one has a deep significance for the theory of time. Thus the syllable is
no longer the measure of time but the thing measured, and Aristoxenus
(op. cit. IL. 76) expressly respects the theory of Aristotle in Meta. 13.1,7.
The diesis plays the same role as the least interval in harmonics.
This is the doctrine of Aristoxenus (op.cit. 11.76), although in the
fragment in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri attributed to him the long is
considered as capable also of representing three times. See H. Weil,

»
ON MUSIC 211

are called in relation to each other. For you remember, if
I am not mistaken, in the discussion a while back we imposed
names on all movements having certain numerical relations
to each other.

D. I remember they were named equal, for they were so
related with respect to time.

M. Now, you don’t think this ordered set of syllables, fur-
nishing its constituents with numbers with respect to one
another, ought to be left without a name, do you?

D. I do not.

M. Well, the ancients called such an ordered set of sounds
a foot.’ But we must be careful to notice just how far reason
allows a syllable to go. And so next tell me in what ratio a
short and a long syllable are with respect to each other.

D. I believe this ordering comes from that genus of num-
bers we called complicate. At least that is so if I am right
in thinking a unit is here ordered with a double, that is,
the short syllable's one time with the long syllable's two.

Etudes de littérature et de rythmique grecques (Paris 1902) , 200-201;

Laloy, Aristoxéne de Tarente, et la musique de Vantiquité (Paris

1901), 329. Aristides also allows a long of three times. This is, of
course. a metrical question and mot a rhythmical one.

5 Augustine here approaches the foot more from its metrical side than
its rhythmical. We have already shown how Aristides Quintilianus
defines the foot rhythmically, and makes the metrical foot depend
on it. Likewise, Aristoxenus, having defined rhythm as a certain
order of primary times, adds: ‘That by which we signify the rhythm
and make it known to sense, is one foot or more than one’ (obicit
11.81). The foot, then, he proceeds to show, is the ratio of is and
thesis which orders the primary times. An ordered set of syllables as
Augustine says, rather than of primary times within the arsis and
thesis, introduces into the notion of foot the metrical considerations of
the order of longs and shorts. Marius Victorinus defines a mixture.
Pes est certus modus syllabarum, quo cognoscimus totius metri speciem,
compositas ex sublatione et positione.—"The foot is a certain measure
of svllable collated from arsis and thesis, by means of which we know
the species of meter’ Ars Gramm., Keil, VIA3). But both he and
Diomedes tend to confuse what the Greeks had stated clearly and
with the conviction of a coherent system.

212 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. And what if the order should be first the long syllable
and then the short syllable? But the change in order doesn’t
change the ratio of complicate numbers, does it? For just
as in the first foot it was one to two, so in this one it is two
to one.

D. That is so.

M. And in a foot of two long syllables, aren’t two times
compared with two times?

D. Evidently.

M. Then from what ratio is such a set taken?

D. Why from those called equals.

(5) M. Now tell me, how many ordered sets of feet we
have treated starting from two short syllables and reaching
two long syllables.

D. Four. For, first there were two shorts; second, a short
and a long; third, a long and a short; and fourth, two longs.

M. There can’t be more than four when the comparison
is of two syllables, can there?

D. Certainly not. For, with syllables measured to give a
short syllable one time and a long one two, and every syllable
either short or long, how can two syllables be compared
with each other or combined to make a foot otherwise than
as short and short, short and long, long and short, or long
and long?

M. Tell me, now, the number of times in the shortest
two-syllable foot, and the number in the longest.

D. The first has two; the other, four.

M. Do you see there: could be no other progression than
from one to four either in feet or times?

D. I see it plainly, and I remember the ratio of progression
in numbers. And with great intellectual pleasure I find that
power residing here also.
ON MUSIC 213

M. Then, since feet consist of syllables, that is, of distinct
and articulate movements of sound, and syllables are exten-
sions of times, don’t you think the progression within the
foot should go to four syllables, just as the progression of
feet and times goes as we have seen to four?

D. I feel about it as you say and I know it is perfectly
reasonable. And what should be I want very much to see done.

Chapter 5

(6) M. Proceed then. First, in good order, let's see how
many three-syllable feet there can be, just as we found out
there were four two-syllable feet.

D. All right.

MM. You remember we laid the beginning of the ratio in
one short syllable, that is, in one time, and you understood
well enough why it should be so.

D. I remember we resolved one must not depart from that
law of counting which enjoins a start from one, the beginning
of numbers.

M. Since, then, in two-syllable feet the first consists of
two short syllables (for reason first demanded one time be
added to one time before two times), what do you think
ought to be first among three-syllable feet?

D. It could only be that composed of three short syllables.

M. And how many times is it?

D. Three, certainly.

M. Then, how are its parts compared to one another? For,
according to number sets, every foot must have two parts to
be compared with each other by means of some ratio. And I
seem to remember we discussed this before. But can we divide
this foot of three short syllables into two equal parts?

D. Not at all.

M. How is it divided, then?
214 SAINT AUGUSTINE

D. The only way seems to be for the first part to contain
one syllable and the second two, or for the first part to contain
two syllables and the second one.

M. Then tell me what number pattern this is from.

D. It seems to be from the genus of complicate numbers.

(7) M. Well now, consider this: How many permuta-
tions are there of three syllables with one long, that is, how
many different feet can be gotten from them? Answer, if you
find out.

D. 1 find a foot consisting of one long and two shorts. I
don't find any other.

M. And so you think only the foot having the long syllable
in first place is a foot having one long in three?

D. No, I don’t, since the two shorts can be first and the
long last.

M. Think whether there is a third.

D. There clearly is, for the long can be placed between
the two shorts.

M. See if there is any fourth possibility.

D. There certainly can't be.

M. Can you tell me now how many permutation there are of
three syllables with one long and two shorts, that is, how
many different feet they can produce?

D. I certainly can, for there were three permutations and
three different feet.

M. Now, can you see at one glance how these three feet
are to be ordered, or do you have to go through them one by
one?

D. Because you don't like the order I found them in? For
first I noticed a long and two shorts, then two shorts and a
long, and finally a short and a long and a short.

M. And so you wouldn't be disturbed at an order going
ON MUSIC 215

from the first to the third, and from the third to the second,
rather than from the first to the second and then to the third?

D. I don't like it at all. But where, I ask, have you seen that
in this case?

M. Because in this tripartite differentiation you have placed
that foot first containing the long syllable in first place, feel-
ing, no doubt, the long syllable's unity gives it preeminence
(if it really is a unit) and on that account ought to bring
forth order by making that the first foot where it itself is first.
And so you should also have seen at the same time the second
foot is where it is second, and third where it is third. Or do
you still think it ought to be in the order you first named
them?

D. I certainly do not. For who wouldn’t agree this is the
better order, or rather, this is order?

M. Now, then, in what number pattern are these feet
divided and their parts related?

D. The first and last I see are divided according to the
equal pattern, because the first can be divided into a long
and two shorts, and the last into two shorts and a long, each
part, therefore, having two times and so being equal. But
in the case of the second, since it has a long syllable in the
middle, whether it be attributed to the first or to the second
part, there is a division either into three times and one time,
or into one and three. And so the ratio of complicate num-
bers presides at its partition.

(8) M. Now I want you to tell me, unaided if you can,
what feet you think ought to be ordered next after those we
have just been discussing. For first we discussed the two-syl-
lable feet with an order fashioned after the order of numbers
so as to begin from the short syllables. Then we undertook
the longer three-syllable feet, and with an easy deduction
216 SAINT AUGUSTINE

from former reasoning we began with three shorts. And then
it was natural we should see how many forms a long syllable
and two shorts would produce. And we have seen. And ac-
cordingly three feet found a necessary place after that first
one. And it’s up to you to see what follows next if we are not
to get everything out of you by these short tedious arguments.

D. You are right. For any one would see the next feet
are those with one short and the rest long. And since by former
reasoning preeminence is given the shorter syllable because
there is only one, that will be the first foot where it is first,
second where it is second, and third where it is third, which
is also the last.

M. I suppose you also see into what ratios they are divided
for the comparison of their parts.

D. I certainly do. For the foot consisting of one short and
two longs can only be divided to give a first part containing
a short and a long and so three times, and a second part
containing the one long syllable's two times. And the third
Íoot is like the first in allowing only one division, but unlike
it in the one's being divided into two and three times while
the other is divided into three and two. For the long syllable
occupying the first part embraces two times, and there remain
a long and short, a three-time interval. But the middle foot
with a middle short syllable allows a double division, because
the same short syllable can be attributed to either the first
or second part, and, therefore, it is divided into either two
and three times or three and two. Hence the ratio of sesquate
numbers dominates these three feet.

M. Have we now considered all the three-syllable feet, or
does any remain?

D. 1 find one left consisting of three longs.

M. Then discuss its division, too.
ON MUSIC 217

D. Its divisions are one syllable and two or two syllables
and one, that is, two times and four times or four and two.
And so this foot’s parts are related in the ratio of complicate
numbers.

Chapter 6

(9) M. Now, let's consider the four-syllable feet properly
and in order, and tell me yourself which of these is to be
first, and give, too, the ratio of division.

D. Very evidently, there’s the foot of four shorts divided
into two parts of two syllables, having each two times in the
ratio of equal numbers.

ΜΟῚ see you understand. And so, now go on by yourself,
following through with the others. For I don’t think you need
to be questioned through each one. For there is the method
[ratio] of removing short syllables one by one and substitut-
ing long syllables for them until you come to all long syllables,
and so of considering what varieties result and how many
feet are produced as the shorts are removed and the longs
substituted. And clearly, the syllable, either long or short,
which is alone of its kind, holds precedence of order. And
you have already had practice in these things. But when there
are two shorts and two longs, a case we have not yet faced,
what syllables do you think are to have precedence?

D. Now this, too, is clear from what has been done before.
The short syllable with one time certainly has more unity
than the long with two. And it was for that we put the foot
consisting of shorts at the head and beginning of them all.

(10) M. There is nothing, then, to keep you from going
through with all these feet while I listen and judge without
questioning.

D. I shall, if I can. To begin with, one short must be sub-
218 SAINT AUGUSTINE

tracted from the four shorts of the first foot and one long
substituted in the first place because of unity’s precedence.
But this foot is divided in two ways: either into one long
and three shorts or into a long and short and two shorts, that
is, either into two times and three times or into three and two.
But when the long syllable is put second, it makes another
foot with one way division, that is, into three times and two,
with the first part containing a short and long and the second
part two shorts. Next, when the long is put third, it makes
a foot again divided one way, but in such a way the first
part has two times with two short syllables, the second part
three with a long and a short. A final long syllable produces
the fourth foot, divided in two ways as when the long was
first. For it can be split either into two shorts and into a
short and long, or into three shorts and into a long, that is,
into two and three times or into three and two times. And
all these four feet, where the long syllable is variously placed
among the three shorts, have their parts interrelated in the
ratio of sesquate numbers.

(11) Next, from the four shorts we take away two and
substitute two longs, and consider how many forms and feet
can be produced with two longs and two shorts. Then I find
two shorts and two longs are to be considered first, because
the beginning is more correctly made with the shorts. But
this foot has a twofold division. For it is split either into two
times and four or into four times and two, so that either two
shorts comprise the first part and two longs the second; or
two shorts and a long comprise the first part while the re-
maining long comprises the second. Another foot is produced
when the two shorts we placed at the beginning, according
to order's demands, have, been put in the middle. And the
division of this foot is into three times and three. For a long
ON MUSIC 219

and a short syllable take up the first part, and a short and
a long the second. But when they are placed last, for this is
the next case, they produce a foot of two divisions, either
with the first part containing two times in one long syllable
and the second four times in one long syllable and two shorts,
or with the first part containing four in two longs and the
second two in two shorts. And the parts of these three feet
are interrelated, in the case of the first and third, by a ratio
of complicate numbers, and in the case of the middle, by
equality.

(12) Next, these two shorts which were placed together
must be split apart. It is the least separation of the two shorts
we must begin with, and it is such the two shorts have a long
syllable between them. And the greatest separation, such
they have two between. But when one long syllable separates
them, this is possible in two ways and two feet are produced.
And the first of these ways is with a short syllable at the
beginning followed by a long; then again a short and the
remaining long. The other way is with the short syllables
second and last, and the long syllables first and third; so it
will be a long and a short, and a long and short. But the
greatest separation occurs when the two longs are between,
and the shorts are first and last. And those three feet with
the short syllables separated are divided into three times
and three, that is, the first into a short and long, and a short
and long; the second into a long and short, and a long and
short; and the third into a short and long, and a long and
short. And so, six feet are produced from two short and two
long syllables placed in relation to each other in as many
different ways as possible.

(13) There remains the subtraction of three shorts from
the four and the substitution of three longs. So there will be
220 SAINT AUGUSTINE

one short. And a short syllable at the beginning followed by
three longs makes one foot; placed second, a second foot;
third, a third foot; and fourth, a fourth. And the first two of
these four feet are divided into three and four times, but the
last two into four and three. And they all have parts ordered
in the ratio of sesquate numbers. For the first part of the first
foot is a short and a long with three times, the second part
is two long with four times. The first part of the second foot is
a long and a short, and, therefore, three times; the second
part two longs or four times. The third foot has a first part
of two longs or four times; a short and long make up the
second part, that is three times. Likewise, two long or four
times make up the first part of the fourth foot; and a long
and short or three times, the second part.. The remaining
foot is four syllables with all shorts removed, so that the foot
consists of four longs. And it is divided into two longs and two
longs according to equal numbers or into four times and four.
—There you have what you wished me to explain by myself
and unaided. Now you go on questioning with the rest.

Chapter 7

(14) ΜΟῚ shall. But have you sufficiently considered
to what extent that progression to four, demonstrated for
numbers, is also true for feet?

D. I certainly judge this ratio of progression to exist in the
ones as in the others.

M. Well, just as feet are made by joining syllables, doesn’t
it seem something can be made by joining feet, something
called neither a foot nor a syllable?

D. It seems so.

M. And what do you think it is?

D. Verse, I suppose.
ON MUSIC 221

M. What if one should wish to keep adding feet together
so as to impose no measure on them or no end to them ex-
cept from a failing in voice, chance interruption, or the neces-
sity of doing something else? Would you also call it a verse
when it has twenty, thirty, a hundred feet or more, in any
length of uninterrupted succession the person putting them
together could or would wish?

D. No. For when I see feet of all sorts thrown together,
many and without end, I shall not call them a verse. But I
can learn from some discipline the genus and number of feet,
that is, what feet and how many go to make up a verse, and
judge accordingly whether I have heard verses or not.

M. Certainly, this discipline, whatever it be, has not estab-
lished a rule and measure for verses in any way at all, but
rather by some ratio.

D. For it should not and could not do otherwise, if it is a
discipline.

M. Then, if you will, let us look for and follow out this
ratio. For if we regard only authority, a verse will be what-
ever an Asclepiades or Archilochus, the ancient poets, or Sap-
pho, a poetess, and others wished to be so. And the kinds
of verses they first invented and sang are called by their
names. For there are verses called Asclepiadean, and Ar-
chilochian, and Sapphic, and a thousand other names be-
longing to Greek authors have been given to verses of various
kinds. And in view of this it would not be absurd to think
that, if someone, to suit himself, has ordered in a certain way
feet of whatever number and kind, he wishes, then, just
because no one before him has established this order and
measure in feet, rightly and lawfully he will be called the
creator and propagator of this new kind of verse. But if this
sort of license is not given man, then one must ask complain-
ingly what merit has been theirs if, following no ratio, they
222 SAINT AUGUSTINE

had the sequence of feet it pleased them to throw together
considered and called a verse. Doesn’t it seem so to you?

D. It is just as you say, and I certainly agree a verse is
generated by ratio rather than authority. And I pray we see
it right away.

Chapter 8

(15) M. Let us see first which feet are to be joined
together; next, what is done with what has been joined, for
a verse doesn’t stand all by itself; finally we shall discuss
the whole rationale of verse. But you don’t imagine we can
easily get through all this without names for the feet, do
you? It is true we have arranged them so they can be called
by their ordinal number; for we can say first, second, third,
and so on in this way. Yet, because the old names are not
to be despised and custom should not be lightly violated
unless it is opposed to reason, we should use the names of
feet the Greeks instituted, now in use among the Latins. And
we take them over without inquiring into the origins of the
names, for this matter has much talk about it and little use-
fulness. For in speaking you don’t name bread, wood, and
stone the less usefully because you don’t know why they are
called so.

D. I think it is certainly as you say.

M. The first foot is called a pyrrhic, constructed of two
shorts, consisting of two times, as fuga.

The second an iamb, of a short and long, as parens, three
times.

The third a trochee, or choree of a long and a short, as
meta, three times.

The fourth a spondee, of two longs, as aestas, four times.

The fifth a tribrach, of three shorts, as macula, three times.
ON MUSIC 223

The sixth a dactyl, of a long and two shorts, as Maenalus,
four times.

The seventh an amphibrach, of a short and a long and
a short, as carina, four times.

The eight an anapest, of two shorts and a long, as Erato,
four times.

The ninth a bacchius, of a short and two longs, as Achetes,
five times.

The tenth a cretic or amphimacer, of a long and a short
and a long, as insulae, five times.

The eleventh an antibacchius, of two longs and a short, as
natura, five times.

The twelfth a molossus, of three longs, as Aeneas, six times.

The thirteenth a proceleusmatic, of four shorts, as avicula,
four times.

The fourteenth a first paeon, of a first long and three
shorts, as legitimus, five times.

The fifteenth, a second paeon, of a second long and three
shorts, as colonia, five times.

The sixteenth a third paeon, of a third long and three
shorts as Menedemus, five times.

The seventeenth a fourth paeon, of a fourth long and three
shorts, as celeritas, five times.

The eighteenth a lesser ionic, of two shorts and two longs,
as Diomedes, six times.

The nineteenth a choriamb, of a long and two shorts and
a long, as armipotens, six times.

The twentieth a greater ionic, of two longs and two shorts,
as Junonius, six times.

The twenty-first a diiamb, of a short and long and a short
and long, as propinquitas, six times.

The twenty-second a dichoree or ditrochee, of a long and
short and a long and short, as cantilena, six times.

224 SAINT AUGUSTINE

The twenty-third an antispast, of a short and two longs
and a short, as Saloninus, six times.

The twenty-fourth a first epitrite, of a first short and three
longs, as sacerdotis, seven times.

The twenty-fifth a second epitrite, of a second short and
three longs, as conditores, seven times.

The twenty-sixth a third epitrite, of a third short and three
longs, as Demosthenes, seven times.

The twenty-seventh a fourth epitrite, of a fourth short and
three longs, as Fescenninus, seven times.

The twenty-eight a dispondee, of four longs, as oratores,
eight times.

Chapter 9

(16) D. I have them. Now discuss the question of which
feet are joined with which.

M. You will easily decide this for yourself, if only you
judge equality and similitude superior to inequality and
dissimilitude.

D. I believe everyone does.

M. Then this is the principal rule to be followed in combin-
ing feet, and there should be no deviation from it without
very just cause.

D. I agree.

M. You will not hesitate, then, to combine pyrrhic feet
with each other, nor iambic, nor trochaic also called choric,
nor spondaic. And so you will have no doubts about combin-
ing any foot with others of the same kind. For you have
the greatest equality when feet are in sequence with those of
their own kind and name. Wouldn't you say so?

D. I don't see any other way of looking at it.

M. So, then, you accept the principle any foot is to be com-
ON MUSIC 225

bined with any other provided an equality is preserved. For
what can give the ear more pleasure than being both delighted
by variety and uncheated of equality?

D. I accept.

M. And only those feet having the same measure are to be
considered equal, aren’t they?

D. 1 should say so.

M. And only those with the same stretch of time are to be
considered of the same measure?

D. That’s true.

M. Then any feet found having the same number of times,
those you will put together without offending the ear.

D. I see that follows.

Chapter 10

(17) M. Quite rightly. But the subject has still mat-
ter for debate. For although the amphibrach* is a foot of
four times, certain people deny it can be mixed either with
dactyls or anapests or spondees, or proceleusmatics. Yet these
are all four-time feet. And they not only deny it can be joined
with these feet,’ but they think also the number does not
proceed correctly and legitimately, even when amphibrach
is combined with amphibrach in a repetition of itself alone.

6 This doctrine of Augustine on the amphibrach is that of Censorinus
also. See. F. Amerio, Il "De Musica" di S. Agostino, Didaskaleion,
Nuova serie 8 (Turin 1939) 173.

Both Aristoxenus and Aristides disallow the 1:3 ratio. Aristoxenus
indeed only allows the 1:1, 1:2, and 2:3 ratios, that is, what he calls
the dactylic, iambic, and paeonic. He refuses the epitritic or 3:4 ratio.
Aristides accepts aM four but no others. There is a good Pythagorean
reason for this doctrine of Aristides and Augustine. These. four ratios
are exactly the ratios of the string-lengths of the intervals of coin-
cidence, of the octave, of the perfect fifth, and of the perfect fourth,
the only consonances admitted in Greek music. This establishes another
correspondence between Rhythmics and Harmonics. Scháfke is also
of this same opinion. See Westphal, Aristox. II 83-85. These ratios,

E
226 SAINT AUGUSTINE

And we must consider their opinion, not to overlook a reason
deserving our compliance and approval.

D. 1 want very much to hear what they say. For it seems
to me this is very interesting, that, of the thirty-two feet
given us by reason, this one alone should be excluded from
the succession of numbers, occupying as it does the same time-
stretch as dactyls and others equal to them just enumerated,
combinations of which are not forbidden.

M. To understand this you must consider the interrelation
of the parts within the other feet. For this way you will find
a strange and peculiar accident in the amphibrach, well justi-
fying the judgment it is little fit to be much applied in
numbers.

(18) But in considering this we must first learn two
names, the arsis [upward beat] and thesis [downward beat].
In making a beat, since the hand is raised and lowered, the
arsis claims one part of the foot, the thesis the other. And I
call these the parts of a foot which we discussed thoroughly
a while ago in treating them in order.* If, then, you accept
this, begin briefly recounting the measures belonging to every
foot’s parts, in order to find the peculiar accident of the one
we are discussing.

for Aristoxenus and Aristides, distinguish rhythmical feet according
to genus. This is the second differentia of feet for Aristoxenus of
which the first is according to magnitude. There are five others of
which the last is according to antithesis, mentioned in another note.

8 In this treatment of arsis and thesis, Augustine seems to recognize
only the mechanical ictus, that is, upward and downward strokes
whose only purpose is to break the rhythmical foot into parts in
certain ratios. There is not a trace here of pséphos kai eremia of
Aristides definition quoted in our first note in this Book which, ac-
cording to Nicolau's interpretation, marks the recognition of a vocal
ictus accompanying the arsis. Consequently, there is no recognition by
Augustine of Aristides’ differentiation of feet Kald antithesin, a
distinction which appears also in the fragments of Aristoxenus. Accord-

ON MUSIC 227

D. I see the first foot or pyrrhic has as much in the arsis
as in the thesis. The spondee, the dactyl, the anapest, pro-
celeusmatic, choriamb, diiamb, dichoree, antispast, and di-
spondee are also divided in the same ratio. For the best takes
as much time going down as coming up. I see the second
foot or iamb has the ratio of one to two. And I find this
ratio also in the choree, tribrach, molossus, and in both ionics.
Now the arsis and thesis of the amphibrach (for it comes in
turn, and I look for others like it) are in the ratio of one to
three. But I certainly find no other in the sequel with parts in
the same relation. For when I look at those consisting of a
short and two longs, that is the bacchius, cretic, and anti-
bacchius, I find their arsis and thesis in the ratio of sesquialter
numbers. There is, again, the same ratio in those four consist-
ing of a long and three shorts, called the four paeons in order.
There remain the four epitrites, similarly named in order,
where the sesquitertian number dominates the arsis and
thesis.

(19) M. You don't think it’s too little reason for exclud-
ing this foot from the numerical series of sounds simply be-

ing to Aristoxenus: ‘Feet differ from each other by antithesis in
having the up-time and the down-time reversed in position. And this
difference will be in feet which are equal but have an unequal order
of up-times and down-times’ (op.cit. IL84). According to Aristides:
"Difference according to antithesis occurs whenever of two feet consid-
ered, the one has the greater time first and the less time second, and
the other vice-versa’ (op. cit. 1.34). Again Aristides says: '. . . rhythm
is constructed from like syllables and antithetical feet. But meter is
never constructed from feet having all syllables like, and rarely from
antithetical feet’ (op.cit. 149-50).

In line with the definition of arsis and thesis of Aristides, it is interest-
ing to consider the text of a later writer, contemporary of Augustine,
Marius Victorinus: Arsis igitur ac thesis quae Graeci dicunt, id est
sublatio et positio, significant pedis motum. Est enim arsis sublatio
pedis sine sono, thesis posito cum sono: item arsis elatio temporis,
soni, vocis, thesis depositio et quaedam contractio syllabarum.—There-
fore the arsis and thesis the Greeks speak of, that is rise and fall,

228 SAINT AUGUSTINE

cause its parts differ to the extent of one to three, do you?
For the nearer the similarity of parts is to equality, the more
worthy of consideration it is. And so, in the rule of numbers
going from one to four, there is nothing nearer each one than
itself. And, therefore, those feet take precedence whose parts
are in relation of equality to each other. Then the union of
single and double emerges in one and two; the sesquialter
union in two and three; and the sesquitertian in three and
four. But the single and triple, although dominated by the
law of complicate numbers, are not brought together by this
ordering. For we do not count three after one, but from
one three is reached by way of two. And this is the reason in
virtue of which the amphibrach is judged to be fittingly
excluded from the combinations of feet we are now discussing.
And if you agree to this, let us go on to the rest.

D. I do agree, for it is all very clear and certain,

signifies the motion of the foot. For arsis is the raising of the foot
without sound, thesis the putting down of the foot with sound: like-
wise arsis is a lengthening out of the time and sound and a raising
of the voice, thesis the lowering and a contraction of the syllables’
(Marius Victorinus, Ars Grammatica, Keil, VI.40).

Nicolau finds the same combination of mechanical and vocal ictus in
the text of Victorinus, and furthermore in the ‘elatio vocis' and
‘contractio syllabarum" he finds the confusion of vocal ictus and accent,
an accent which is no longer musical and which becomes more and
more the pivotal point of rhythm, meter, and word in accordance
with the natural laws of accent of Latin. The accent becomes the
‘soul of the word’ and the totality of the word must be preserved

scansion. See texts of Pompeius, Capella, and Sacerdos quoted by
Nicolau, op.cit. 65-66. It is for this reason, according to Nicolau,
that the Latin metricists at times invert the use of arsis and thesis,
the arsis for the strong time and the thesis for the weak. The exact
meaning of the antithetical difference in Aristoxenus and Aristides
and whether it is exactly the same thing in both is hard to determine.
Bartels, in his Aristoxeni Elementorum Rhythmicorum Fragmentum
(Bonn 1854) 51-52, considers it simply a difference in up-time and
down-time and chides Aristides for his clumsy rendition of these
terms by ‘greater time’ and ‘less time.’ Nicolau follows Desrousseaux
in considering the difference to be one of strong time, the simple fact
of the occurrence of a constantly repeated pattern of long times.

ON MUSIC 229

Chapter 11

(20) M. Since, then, you are willing all feet save
only the amphibrach can be combined one with another
regularly and without violation of the principle of equality,
no matter what their mutual relations in syllables if only
they are the same quantity in time, it is perhaps well to inquire
whether those also are regularly combined which, although
equal in time, yet do not agree in the beat where arsis and
thesis throw the foot’s one part against the other. For the
dactyl, anapest, and spondee are not only similarly timed,
but they are also beat to the same stroke. For in all of them
the arsis carries equal weight with the thesis. And so these
are more properly put together than any of the ionics with
the other feet of six times. For each of the ionics is beat to
one-two time, that is, two times against four. The molossus,
too, is like them in this. But the other six-time feet have
equal divisions, for here three times go to the arsis and thesis
each. And so, although all of them have an acceptable beat—
for the first three are beat in a one-two ratio and the other
four in equal parts—yet, because such a combination gives
unequal strokes, I don’t at all know if reason’s judgment
would countenance it. Or have you something to the point?

Thus a spondee in a series of dactyls would be antithetical to a
spondee in a series of anapests. See Nicolau, op.cit. 47, n2. Nicolau,
of course, denies the existence of a vocal ictus in Aristoxenus and at
any time much previous to Aristides. In any case, Augustine must have
been aware of these evolutions in doctrine and practice. His Psalm
against the Donatist Faction would seem to guarantee that. This flight
of his, therefore, into a purely musical rhythmics, into a sort of meta-
rhythmics, has more significance than has been supposed. Amerio, in
his study of Augustine sources, considers it a return to an older
tradition of pure rhythmical doctrine. See F. Amerio, of.cit. 167-193.

9 Obviously arsis and thesis are not essentially different, except for
the numerical division of the foot.
230 SAINT AUGUSTINE

D. I am readier to pass judgment here. For I do not see
how an unequal beat could avoid offending the sense of hear-
ing. And if it offends, it cannot occur without a flaw in the
combination.

(21) M. But you know the ancients judged such feet to
be properly combined and they constructed verses composed
this way. But, not to oppress you with authority, take a verse
of that sort and see if it offends your ear. For if it should not,
but rather delight you, there will be no reason jor rejecting
this combination. And here are the verses I wish you to
listen to:

At consona quae sunt, nisi vocalibus aptes,
Pars dimidium vocis opus proferet ex se:
Pars muta soni comprimet ora molientum:
Illis sonus obscurior impeditiorque,
Utrumque tamen promitur ore semicluso."

I believe that's enough for judging what I want. And so tell
me now if this number hasn't been pleasing to hear.

D. True, nothing seems to me to flow and sound more
agreeably.

M. Now look to the feet. You will quickly find that, of the
five verses, the first two run in ionics only, and the last
three have a dichoree mixed in, although all of them are
equally pleasing.

D. Y have already noticed this, and more readily while you
recited.

M. Why, then, do we hesitate to agree with the ancients,
conquered not by their authority but by the very reason of
those who think feet of the same time-measure can with rea-
son be combined if only their beat is proper although diverse?

10 Terentianus Maurus, De Litteris, 11. 89-93 (Keil VL328).
ON MUSIC 231

D. I am ready now to give way. For their sound gives me
no ground for contradiction.

Chapter 12
(22) M. In the same way listen to these verses:

Volo tandem tibi parcas, labor est in chartis,
Et apertum ire per auras animum permittas.
Placet hoc nam sapienter, remittere interdum
Aciem rebus agendis decenter intentam.

D. That is enough.

M. Too true, for these verses I was forced to compose on
the spur of the moment are pretty rude. And yet I want to
know the judgment your sense passes in the case of these
four, too.

D. And here again what else is there to say except they
sounded correct and smooth?

M. Do you see here, also, the first two verses are composed
of second ionics, called lesser, but the last two have a diiamb
thrown in?

D. I was very conscious of your putting it in when you
recited.

M. Well, aren't you interested in the fact that in the verses
of Terentianus a dichoree was thrown in with the ionic called
greater, but in these verses of ours a diiamb has been cast in
with the other ionic called lesser? Or do you think this is
trivial?

D. It is quite important and I seem to see the reason. For,
since the greater ionic begins with two longs, it ought rather to
be joined with the dichoree where there is a first long. But
the diiamb because it begins with a short is more suitably
combined with the other ionic beginning with the two shorts.
232 SAINT AUGUSTINE

(23) Μ. Your understanding is good. And so it must be
held, given the equality of times, a symmetry of this kind
must have some weight in combining feet. For, though it is
not of the greatest importance, yet it is not negligible. For
your own sense of hearing can judge any six-time foot capable
of substitution for any other six-time foot. First let us have
an example of a molossus, virtutes; then a lesser ionic, mode-
ratas; then of a choriamb, percipies; a greater ionic, conce-
dere; a diiamb, benignitas; a dichoree, civitasque; an antis-
past, volet justa.

D. Thave them.

M. Then put them together and recite them, or better,
listen to me recite them so your sense of hearing may be
freer of its time for judging. For to introduce the equality of
a continued number without offending your ears, 1 shall give
the whole combination three times. And I am sure that will
be enough. Virtutes moderatas percipies, concedere benignitas
civitasque volet justa. Virtutes moderatas percipies, concedere
benignitas civitasque volet justa. Virtutes moderatas per-
cipies, concedere benignitas civitasque volet justa. You don't
find anything in this flow of feet, do you, to rob your ears of
equality and smoothness?

D. Not at all.

M. Were they pleased, then? Although, in this kind of
thing, it logically follows what does not offend delights.

D. I can't say I have been affected otherwise than you
expect.

M. Then your decision is, all these six-time feet can with
propriety be combined and mixed.

D. It is.

Chapter 13

(24) M. Aren't you afraid some one may think these
ON MUSIC 233

feet were capable of this equal balance in sound because
of this particular order, and another order would destroy it?

D. That is certainly an objection, but it is not hard to find
out.

M. You will do that when there's time, and you'll only find
your hearing is delighted by a single equality and a multi-
form difference.

D. I shall go through with it, although everyone foresees
what will happen here.

M. You are right. But what is more to the point I shall
run through them with the accompanying beats to enable you
to decide whether there is a flaw or not. But as soon as you
have made some trial of the possible permutations we have
already declared harmless, make the change and, as you will,
give me for recitation and rhythmical delivery these same
feet placed otherwise than I had them.

D. First I want the lesser ionic, next the greater ionic, third
the choriamb, fourth the diiamb, fifth the antispast, sixth the
dichoree, seventh the molossus.

M. Now, fix your ears on the sound and your eyes on the
beats. For the hand beating time is not to be heard but seen,
and note must be taken of the amount of time given to the
arsis and to the thesis.

D. I shall follow as well as I can.

M. All right, then, for the order of feet you have given me
and their beats: Moderatas, concedere, percipies, benignitas,
volet justa, civitasque, virtutes.

D. I see no flaw in the beat, and as much time is given to
the arsis as to the thesis. But I certainly wonder how those
Íeet with a division in a one-two ratio could have been beat
to this time, such, for example, as the ionics and the molossus.

M. Well, what do you think is done here with three meas-
ures in each the arsis and thesis?
234 SAINT AUGUSTINE

D. Only this, that the long syllable, second in the greater
ionic and molossus, but third in the lesser ionic, is divided by
the beat itself so that, of its two times, one is attributed to the
first part and one to the second, and so the arsis and thesis
are each allotted three times.

(25) M. There is nothing more to be said or understood
on this score. But why couldn't the amphibrach we so utterly
struck from the list also be combined with the spondee, dactyl,
and anapest, or itself produce a numerical or harmonious
line with a succession of amphibrachs? For the middle syllable
of this foot, being long, can also be divided by the beat into
a like ratio, so that, when each side has in this way been
given a time, the arsis and thesis no longer claim one and
three times respectively, but each two. Have you anything to
say to that?

D. Nothing except to say the amphibrach must also be
allowed.

M. Then let us beat the time to an ordered composition of
four-time feet with an amphibrach included, and find out if
there is any inequality to offend this sense of hearing. And
now listen to this number, given three times to facilitate a
judgment. Sumas optima, facias honesta. Sumas optima,
facias honesta. Sumas optima, facias honesta.

D. Please spare me. For, even without the accompaniment
of the beat, the very flow of the feet runs away in that
amphibrach.

11 This dissolution of the syllabic structure of the molossus to allow
it to be beat with any other six-time foot is another sign of the
character of this treatise. Everywhere we find the dissolution of the
inner structure or purely metrical structure of the foot in favor of
an all embracing and entirely rational arithmetic rhythmics. E. Graf
has already remarked on this in his Rhythmus und Metrum (Mar-
burg 1891) 66 and nl. He points out this might well lead to the

breaking up of an overlapping ionic and gives an example from
Marius Victorinus.
ON MUSIC 235

M. What, then, is the cause what could be done in the
case of the molossus and ionics cannot be done here? Is it
because in the first case the sides are equal to the middle? For,
six is the first even number where the sides are equal to the
middle. Then, since the six-time feet have two times in the
middle and two each on the sides, the middle falls in happily
with the sides fitting with complete equality. But it is not the
same in the amphibrach, where the sides are not equal to the
middle, for there is one time in each of the sides and two in the
middle. And so in the ionics and the molossus, when the
middle has been dissolved into the sides, the times are three
each. And in each of these sides again are found equal sides
with an equal middle. And this doesn't occur in the amphi-
brach either.

D. It's as you say. And it's not without cause the amphi-
brach, put in that sequence, offends my hearing, while the
others please it.

Chapter 14

(26) M. Come now, explain briefly on your own, as far
as you can, which feet are to be mixed with which, begin-
ning with the pyrrhic and in accordance with the ratios Just
given.

D. None with the pyrrhic, for no other foot with the same
number of times is to be found. The choree can be combined
with the iamb. But this combination is to be avoided on ac-
count of the unequal beat, for one begins with a single beat,
the other with a double. And so the tribrach can be fitted in
with either one. I find the spondee, dactyl, anapest, and
proceleusmatic are compatible and permit of combination.
For they agree not only in the number of times, but also in
the beat. But the amphibrach we excluded could not be re-
duced by any ratio; equality of times was of no avail, for its
236 SAINT AUGUSTINE

division and beat are discordant. It is clear the cretic and
first, second, and fourth paeons agree in times and beat with
the bacchius. And this same cretic, and the first, third, and
fourth paeons with the antibacchius. Therefore, all the other
five-time feet can be combined, without any hitch, with the
cretic and the first and fourth paeons, since a division can be
made of them, beginning either with two or three times. It
has already been sufficiently argued there is a strange agree-
ment of all the six-time feet among themselves. For even those
where the status of the syllables results in a different division
do not clash in beat with the others, so great is the force of
the equality of the sides with the middle. To go on, of the
four seven-time feet called epitrites, I find the first and second
can be combined, for the division of both begins with three
times and, therefore, they disagree neither in time-interval nor
in beat. Again the third and fourth are readily combined,
because both have a first division of four times, and so have
an equal time and beat. There remains the eight-time called
dispondee, and just as with the pyrrhic there is no foot equal
to it. Now you have what you asked of me and as much as
I have been able to do. You go on with the rest.

M. I shall. But let's breathe a little after such a long discus-
sion, and let's recall those verses fatigue prompted me with on
the spur of the moment, a little while back.

Volo tandem tibi parcas, labor est in chartis,
Et apertum ire per auras animum permittas.
Placet hoc nam sapienter, remittere interdum
Aciem rebus agendis decenter intentam.*

D. I am very willing, and gladly obey.

12 "And now I want you to spare yourself (there is drudgery in letters),
and to let your mind run free to the winds. For this is a judicious
pleasure, to relax at times your attention when it has been properly

strained to business."
BOOK THREE

The difference between rhythm, meter, and verse; then
rhythm is discussed separately; and next the treatise on

meter begins.
Chapter 1

(1) M. Now, since enough has been said about the
harmony and agreement of feet among themselves, this third
discussion warrants our seeing what arises from their composi-
tion and from the sequences of them. And so first I ask you
whether those feet which can properly be put together can
be combined to create a sort of continuing number without
definite end, as when chorus-boys beat castanets and cymbals
with their feet according to numbers whose combinations are
pleasing to the ear, but yet in an unending flow so that, un-
less you should hear the flutes, you could in no way mark
how far the combination of feet runs forward and from where
it returns to begin again. It's as if you should want a hundred
pyrrhics or more, as many as you please, or any other feet
belonging together, to run on in continuous combination.

D. I now understand, and I agree a certain combination of
Íeet can be made in which it is fixed just how many feet the
progression is to be, before it starts over again.

M. Then you are not doubting the existence of this sort
of thing, since you don't deny there's a certain discipline for
making verses, you who have always confessed to hearing them

with pleasure?

237
238 SAINT AUGUSTINE

D. It’s evident there's such a thing, and that it's distinct
from the other kind we talked about before.

(2) M. Then, since it’s proper for things distinct from
each other to be distinguished by names, it’s well to learn the
first kind of combination is called rhythm by the Greeks; the
second, meter. In Latin they could be called, the first, number
[numerus]; the second, measure [mensio or mensura].' But,
since these names are very current with us, and since we must
be careful not to speak ambiguously, we find the use of the
Greek names more convenient. Yet you see, I believe, how
correctly each of these names is imposed. For, since there is a
rolling forward in fixed feet, and a hitch if dissonant feet are
mixed together, this sort of thing is rightly called rhythm or
number. But, because the rolling forward has no measure, and
there has been no decision as to what foot is to be used as a
definite end, this ought not to be called meter because there is
an absence of measure in the succession. But meter has both:
it runs in fixed feet and in fixed measure. And so it is not only
meter because of a distinct end, but it is also rhythm be-

1 The result of Augustine's theories is seen clearly in this definition of
meter, as Graf has pointed out. It is not a new definition, but other
writers usually give it, along with the other definitions stressing the
strictly metrical qualities of the foot.

‘To say meter is simply the measuring off of rhythm is to deny any-
thing specifically metrical. Quite different is the approach of Aristides
Quintilianus; for him, meter is the differentiation within the rhythm-
ical foot, its inner structure. But for Augustine, only two things are
demanded: that the feet be equal in length and that the ratio of
their parts be the same. There is no mention of rhythmical modula-
tion as in Aristides. The real differentiation between arsis and thesis
is ignored as something outside of the rhythm.

Many scholars consider this definition to be from Varro, but Aristides
also gives it among others and. Diomedes reports Varro as giving quite
another ‘inter rythmum, qui latine numerus vocatur, et metrum hoc
inherere, quod inter materiam et regulam." See Grat, op.cit. 64.

Amerio points out that Censorinus, one of the oldest of the metricists,
gives also the same notion of homogeneity of meter: "Numerus est
aequalium pedum legitima ordinatio. Sec Amerio, op. cit, 168-172.

ON MUSIC 239

cause of the rational composition of feet. And so all meter is
rhythm, but not all rhythm is meter. For the name rhythm
makes such an extensive appearance in music that the whole
part of it having to do with longs and shorts has been called
rhythm. But it has seemed good to both the learned and the
wise that there need be little trouble about the name since
the thing itself is clear. Or do you perhaps have something
to oppose, or think there ought to be some doubt about what
I have said?

D. On the contrary, I agree with you.

Chapter 2

(3) M. Now then, consider this question with me:
Whether just as all verse is meter, so all meter is verse.

D. I am considering the question, but I find nothing to
reply.

M. Why do you think you have gotten into this difficulty?
Isn't it because it's a question of names? For we can't reply to
a question about names as to one about things belonging to
a discipline, because things are implanted in the minds of all
in common, but names are imposed arbitrarily, and their
force depends for the most part on authority and usage.
And so there can be a diversity in tongues, but in the very
truth of constituted things there certainly cannot be. Take
from me, then, what you could nowise get for yourself: the
ancients spoke of meter, not verse only. And so, what you are
to do is to say and see (for it is not a matter of names)
whether there is a difference between the following two things:
the one case where a certain number of feet are so defined by
a fixed end there is nothing in the way of an articulation
before this end is reached; the other case where there is not
only a closure by a fixed end, but also before the end a divi-
240 SAINT AUGUSTINE

sion appears in a definite place to produce two members as
it were.

D. I don’t understand.

M. Listen to these examples:

Ite igitur, Camoenae
Fonticolae puellae,
Quae canitis sub antris
Mellifluos sonores;
Quae lavitis capillum
Purpureum Hippocrene
Fonte, ubi fusus olim
Spumea lavit almus
Ora jubis aquosis
Pegasus, in nitentem
Pervolaturus aethram.

You certainly see the first five of these so-called versicles have
the break in discourse in the same place, that is, at the chor-
iambic foot, to which is added a bacchius to complete the
versicle (for these eleven versicles consist of choriambic and
bacchic feet, but the others, except one, namely, Ora jubis
aquosis, do not have the break in discourse in that same
place.

D. I see that, but I don't see what it's about.

M. Why so you may understand, this meter doesn't have
a place somehow laid down by law for a break in discourse
before the end of the verse. For if it did, all would have this
articulation in the same place or at least one which didn't
would be rarely found among them. But, here of these eleven,
six do, and five do not.

D. I see that and I am still waiting to see where reason is
going.

M. Well, listen then to the well-worn words, Arma virum-
ON MUSIC 241

que cano, Troiae qui primis ab oris And not to take up
time, since the poem is very well known, exploring each verse
as far as you wish, you will always find a part of the dis-
course completed in the fifth half-foot, that is, two and a
half feet from the beginning. For these verses consist of feet
of four times, and so this completion of a part of the discourse
in the tenth time is laid down by law, you might say.
D. "That's evident.

(4) M. Then you see there is a difference in the two
kinds I have just given examples of. For one meter before its
close has clearly no fixed and determined division, as we
saw in those eleven little verses, but the other has, as the fifth
half-foot in the heiroic meter sufficiently indicates.

D. What you say is now clear.

M. Now the first kind, you should know, is not called verse
by the learned men among the ancients in whom there is
great authority, but that is defined as verse and so called
which consists, you might say, of two members joined in a
fixed measure and ratio. But don't trouble yourself too much
about a name you couldn't possibly come out with on any
amount of questioning without its being thrown at you by
me or someone else. But what reason teaches, keep your mind
first and foremost on that, as we are now doing. For reason
teaches there is a difference between these two kinds, no mat-
ter what names they are called by. And so, if questioned cor-
rectly, you could put your finger on the difference, confident
in the truth itself, but the names you couldn't without follow-
ing authority.

D. Y was already very clear about that. And what you so
constantly harp on I now consider as important as you do.

M. Then I want you to learn by heart these names we are

2 Vergil, Aeneid 1.1.
242 SAINT AUGUSTINE

forced to use from the necessities of: discourse itself: rhythm,
meter, and verse. And these are distinct in such a way that
all meter is also rhythm, but not all rhythm meter. And like-
wise that all verse is also meter, but not all meter verse. There-
fore, all verse is rhythm and meter. For you see, I am sure,
this follows.

D. I certainly do, for it's clearer than light.

Chapter 3

(5) AM. First, then, if you will, let's discuss as far as
we can the rhythm that's without meter, then the meter with-
out verse, and finally verse itself.

D. Very willingly.

M. Now, take from your own head pyrrhic feet, and com-
pose a rhythm of them.

D. And now if I should be able to do this, what will be its
length?

M. It will be enough to extend it (for we are doing it as
an example) up to ten feet. For verse, which will be thor-
oughly discussed in its proper place, does not go as far as
this number of feet.

D. You do well not to ask me to put many feet together.
But just the same you don't seem to me to remember you
have already sufficiently distinguished the difference between
the grammarian and the musician when I told you I didn't
possess the knowledge of long and short syllables, a knowledge
passed down by grammarians. Unless, perhaps you let me
show the rhythm in beats and not in words. For I don't deny
I am capable of ear-judgments for regulating the values of
times. But as to what syllables are to be pronounced long or
short, since it's a matter of authority, I am altogther ignorant.
ON MUSIC 243

M. I admit we distinguished a grammarian from a musician
in the way you say, and you confessed your ignorance of this
sort of thing. And so take this by way of example from me:
Ago celeriter agile quod ago tibi quod anima velit.

D. I have it.

(6) M. Now, by repeating this as many times as you
will, you could make the length of this rhythm as great as
you wished, although these ten feet are enough for an ex-
ample. But I want to know this. If anyone should tell you
this rhythm is composed not of pyrrhic feet but of proceleus-
matics, what will you say?

D. I certainly don't know. For where there are ten pyrrhics
I can measure five proceleusmatics, and therefore there is a
greater doubt about the decision to be made in the case of a
rhythm flowing on without stop. For eleven or thirteen or
any odd number of pyrrhics cannot contain a whole number
of proceleusmatics. And so, if there were a fixed end to the
rhythm in question, we could at least say it ran rather in pyr-
rhics than in proceleusmatics in the case where all the feet
would not be whole proceleusmatics. But this infinity con-
founds our judgment even when the feet are counted out for
us, but in an even number, as these ten are.

M. But the question isn't even clear as it seemed to you in
the case of the uneven number of pyrrhics. For what if, given
eleven pyrrhic feet, one should say they are five and a half
proceleusmatics? What's wrong with that since we find many
verses closing with a half-foot?

D. I have already said I don't see what to do about this
matter.

M. But you aren't at a loss about this, are you, that, if the
proceleusmatic is made of two pyrrhics, then the pyrrhic is
prior to the proceleusmatic? For, just as one is prior to two,
244 SAINT AUGUSTINE

and two to four, so the pyrrhic is prior to the proceleusmatic.

D. That’s very true.

M. Then, since we fall into this ambiguity of both the
pyrrhic’s and the proceleusmatic’s being measured in the one
thythm, to which are we to give preference? To the prior one
the other is composed of, or to the secondary one the other
is not composed of?

D. To the prior one certainly.

M. Why, then, on being consulted about this do you
hesitate to reply this rhythm is to be called pyrrhic rather

than proceleusmatic?
D. I don't hesitate at all now. I am ashamed at not having

immediately noticed such an evident reason.

Chapter 4

(7) M. Do you now see by this reasoning you are
forced to the conclusion there are certain feet not able to con-
tinue the rhythm uninterruptedly? For, what was found to be
true of the proceleusmatic with its priority usurped by the
pyrrhic can also be proved, I think, for the dichoree and the
diiamb. Or does it appear otherwise to you?

D. How can it, for, after the reason has been established,
I cannot disprove what follows from it.

M. Then consider all this too, and compare and judge.
For it seems when such an uncertainty occurs the distinction
ought to be made by the beat rather than by the foot it runs
in. And so if you wish to run in pyrrhics, you'll have one time
for the arsis, one for the thesis; if in proceleusmatics, two and
two. And in this way the foot will be unambiguous, and no
Íoot will be excluded from a purely rhythmical succession.

D. I am more inclined toward the opinion leaving no foot
free of this kind of succession.
ON MUSIC 245

(8) M. You are right, and for your greater approval
think what we could reply in the case of the tribrach, if some-
one should further contend this rhythm runs not in pyrrhics
or proceleusmatics, but in tribrachs.

D. I see judgment must be referred to the beat, so that,
if there is one time in the arsis and two in the thesis, that is
one and two syllables, or if two in the arsis and one in the
thesis, the rhythm is said to be tribrach.

M. "That's right. Therefore, tell me now whether the spon-
daic foot can be joined with the pyrrhic rhythm.

D. Not at all. For the same beat will not continue, since
the arsis and thesis in the pyrrhic have each one time, but
in the spondee each two times.

M. Then it can be joined with the proceleusmatic.

D. It can.

M. Then suppose it is, what will we say when we are asked
whether the rhythm is proceleusmatic or spondaic?

D. How can you decide, unless preference is to be given the
spondee? For since the beat does not here decide the case—
in both rhythms the arsis and thesis take two times—what else
is there to do except to prefer that which is prior in the order
of feet?

M. I quite approve the reasoning you have followed. And
you see, I am sure, what that entails.

D. Well, what?

M. Why that no other foot can be mixed with the pro-
celeusmatic rhythm. For whatever foot consisting of the same
times is mixed in—and otherwise the mixing is not possible
—the name of the rhythm would necessarily be transferred
to it. For all those feet consisting of the same number of
times are prior to the proceleusmatic. And since reason forces
us, as we have seen, to prefer the prior, that is, to name the
rhythm by them, there will no longer be any proceleusmatic
246 SAINT AUGUSTINE

rhythm with some other four-time rhythm mixed in, but a
spondaic or dactylic or anapestic rhythm. For it is agreed
the amphibrach is rightly excluded from the composition of
such numbers.

D. I admit it’s so.

(9) M. Now, next in order let's consider the iambic
rhythm, since we have now sufficiently discussed the pyrrhic
and proceleusmatic born of the double pyrrhic. And so tell
me what foot is to be mixed in, with the iambic rhythm's
still keeping its name.

D. Why, the tribach, of course, agreeing as it does in beat
and times. And yet, being posterior, it cannot prevail over
the iambic. The choree is also posterior and of the same
number of times, but it hasn't the same beat.

M. Now examine the trochaic rhythm, and here again
give me a reply to the same purpose.

D. My reply is the same, for the tribach can fit in with it
not only in extent of time but also in beat. But it's clear the
iambic must under these conditions be avoided. For even if
it were of equal beat, yet in the mixing it would carry off
the palm.

M. And further, what foot shall we compound with the
spondaic rhythm?

D. In this case there is evidently a very great number of
choices. For I see the dactyl, the anapest, and the proceleus-
matic can be mixed in with it without inequality of times,
without any hitch in the beat, and without claims of priority.

(10) ΜΟῚ see now you can easily explain the others in
order. And so without my questioning, or rather as if ques-
tioned about them all, tell as briefly and clearly as you can
how each of the remaining feet, with others lawfully mixed
in, gets its name in the rhythm.
ON MUSIC 247

D. I shall. For it’s no trouble with such a light of reasons
cast before. And none will be mixed with the tribach, for all
equal to it in time are prior to it. The anapest can be mixed
with the dactyl, for it is posterior and runs in equal time and
beat. But the proceleusmatic is compounded with both for the
same reason. Now the cretic, and the first, second, and fourth
paeons can be mixed with the bacchius. Further, all the five-
time feet after the cretic are by right mixed with the cretic
itself, but they are not all of the same division. For, some
are divided in the ratio of two to three, and others of three
to two. But the cretic can be divided both ways, because the
middle short is attributed to either part. But the antibacchius,
because its division begins with two times and ends with
three, is suited to, and composable with, all the paeons except
the second. Of the trisyllabic feet there remains only the
molossus, the beginning of the six-time feet, all of which can
be joined with it: partly on account of the one-two ratio,
and partly on account of that partition of the long syll-
able giving up to each part one time, because in the num-
six the middle is equal to the sides. And therefore the mol-
lossus and both ionics can be given not only a one-two beat,
but also a three-three beat in equal parts. And so all posterior
six-time feet can be compounded with any six-time foot.
And so there is only the antispast allowing no mixture. The
Íour epitrites follow: the first accepting the second; the
second, none; the third, the fourth; and the fourth none.
And finally there is the dispondee, it, too, beating out its
rhythm only alone, because it finds no foot posterior to it
or equal to it. And so of all the feet there are eight giving
rhythm of their own only if no other foot is mixed in: the
pyrrhic, tribrach, proceleusmatic, fourth paeon, antispast, sec-
ond and fourth epitrites, and dispondee. The others allow
those posterior to them to be compounded with them without
248 SAINT AUGUSTINE

dropping their name from the rhythm even if they are fewer.
And this, I believe, is what you wanted of me, sufficiently
digested and explained. It is up to you now to explain what
is left.

Chapter 5

(11) M. And up to you, too, along with me, for we
are both in the search. But what do you think there is left
to say about rhythm? Isn’t it pertinent to find out if there
isn’t a foot more than four syllables in length although it
doesn’t exceed the eight times of the dispondee?

D. Why, I ask?

M. And you, why do you ask me rather than yourself? Or
don’t you think two short syllables can be substituted for one
long without deceiving or offending the ear either with re-
spect to the beat and division of feet or to the matters con-
cerning time?

D. Who would deny they could?

M. And so in this way we substitute a tribrach for an iamb
or choree, and a dactyl or anapest or proceleusmatic for a
spondee, when we substitute two shorts for the second long or
for the first, or four shorts for both longs.

D. I agree.

M. Do this same thing in any ionic, or in any other four-
syllable foot of six times, and substitute two shorts for any
one long. There is no loss in the time or hitch in the beat,
is there?

D. Not at all.

M. Let's see, then, how many syllables there are.

D. I see there are five.

M. You see, then, the four syllables can certainly be
exceeded.

D. I certainly do.
ON MUSIC 249

M. And what if you should substitute four shorts for the
two longs there? Wouldn’t six syllables have to be measured
in one foot?

D. So they would.

M. What if you dissolve all the longs of any epitrite into
shorts? It would certainly make seven syllables, wouldn’t it?

D. Certainly.

M. And what about the dispondee? Doesn't it make eight
syllables when we substitute two shorts each for all the longs?

D. That's very true.

(12) M. What, then, is this ratio we are forced to meas-
ure feet of so many syllables by, and do we admit in accord-
ance with ratios already discussed a foot used for numbers
does not exceed four syllables? Don't these seem to you
contradictory?

D. Very much so, and I don't see how it can be patched up.

M. This is easy enough, if you again ask yourself whether
a while back we rationally established the pyrrhic and pro-
celeusmatic ought to be determined and distinguished by beat
so there might be no foot lawfully divided not producing a
rhythm, that is, not having a rhythm named after it.

D. I certainly remember this, and I don't see why I should
have misgivings about its having seemed right to me. But
where is this leading?

M. Well, clearly all the four-syllable feet, except the amphi-
brach, produce a rhythm, that is, they hold priority in rhythm,
and bring it about in use and name. But many having more
than four syllables can be substituted for these, yet they can-
not themselves produce the rhythm nor impose their name
upon it. And so I shouldn't have thought they ought to be
called feet. And therefore those contradictions troubling us
are now, I believe, arranged and laid at rest when it is pos-
250 SAINT AUGUSTINE

sible to substitute more syllables than four for any foot and
yet not to call foot anything not producing a rhythm. For
it was proper to establish for the foot some measure of syll-
able-progression. But that measure could best be established,
transferred from the ratio of numbers and consisting in
fours. And so there could be a foot of four long syllables.
And when, instead, we construct one of eight shorts, occupying
the same interval of time, it can be substituted for the other.
But because the eight shorts exceed the lawful progression,
that is, the number four, not the sense of hearing but the law
of the discipline forbids their being substituted for it and
producing a rhythm.— Perhaps you wish to oppose?

(13) D. I very much intend to, and I shall do so right
now. For what kept the foot from going on up to eight syl-
lables, since we see that number can be allowed as far as
rhythm is concerned? And your saying it can be substituted
Íor another doesn't move me, but on the contrary it puts me
in mind to ask about or, rather, to complain about a thing's
being substituted for another without also taking over its own
name.

M. It's not surprising you are deceived, but there's an easy
explanation of the truth. For, omitting the many things al-
ready disputed in favor of the number four, and why the syll-
able-progression should only go so far, suppose I have given in
to you and have agreed the length of a foot ought to be ex-
tended to eight syllables. You can't object, then, to the pos-
sibility of a foot of eight long syllables? For, certainly, the
maximum length of a foot in terms of syllables applies alike
to both longs and shorts. And so, when the law permitting
the substitution of two shorts for a long is again applied—
and it can't be cut short—we get to sixteen syllables. .And at
that point if you should want again to decree the foot’s in-
ON MUSIC 251

crease, we arrive at thirty-two shorts. Your reason compels
you to bring the foot that far, too, and the law again compels
you to substitute a double number of shorts for the longs.
And in this way no limit will be established.

D. Well I give in to your reason of taking the foot only as far
as four syllables. But I don’t reject the fact it’s proper for feet
of more syllables to be substituted for these legitimate feet,
with two shorts in the place of one long.

Chapter 6

(14) M. Then it is easy for you also to see and agree
there are certain feet put in place of those having priority
in rhythm, others which are placed with them. For, where
two shorts are substituted for each long, we put another foot
in place of the one holding the rhythm: for example, a tri-
brach in place of an iamb or trochee, or a dactyl or anapest
or proceleusmatic in place of a spondee. But where that is
not the case, whatever lower foot is mixed in is placed with,
not in place of: for example, an anapest with a dactyl, and
a diiamb or a dichoree with either ionic, and similarly for
the others according to their peculiar laws. Or does this seem
false to you, or too obscure?

D. No, I understand now.

M. Then tell me whether the feet put in place of others can
also produce rhythms on their own.

D. They can.

M. All?

D. All.

M. Then even a five-syllable foot can produce a rhythm in
its own name, because it can be put in place of a bacchius or
cretic or any of the paeons.

D. But it cannot. For we no longer call this a foot, if I
252 SAINT AUGUSTINE

remember well enough the progression to four. But when I
replied all could, I replied only feet could.

M. And I praise your diligence and vigilance in retaining
a name. But it is true, you know, many have thought it proper
for even six-syllable groups to be called feet. Yet, as far as I
know, for more than that no one has thought it proper.
And even those favoring the six-syllable foot have denied its
applicability in producing a rhythm or meter of its own.
And so it wasn’t even given a name. And so the four-syllable
measure of progression is the truest, since all those feet, at
whose division two cannot be made, have been able, joined
together, to make a foot. And so, those who have gone as far
as the sixth syllable have dared give only the name of foot to
those exceeding the fourth syllable; but they have not al-
lowed them to aspire to the domination of rhythms and meters.
But when the shorts are substituted by twos for the longs, even
the seventh and eight syllables are reached, as reason has al-
ready shown. But no one has extended the foot this far. But
since I see we have agreed any foot of more than four syl-
lables, when we have substituted two shorts for each long, can
be put in place of, but not with, the legitimate feet and cannot
create a rhythm of its own, lest in this way things determined
by reason go on to infinity, let us pass on to meter, if you will,
having, I belived, talked enough about rhythm.

D. 1 am willing, certainly.

Chapter 7

(15) M. Tell me, then, would you say meter is made
of feet or feet of meter?
D. I don't understand.

M. Do feet joined together produce meter, or meters joined
together produce feet?
ON MUSIC 253

D. I know now what you are saying, and I think meter is
produced by the joining together of feet.

M. But why do you think that?

D. Because you said there was this difference between rhy-
thm and meter: in rhythm the conjunction of feet has no de-
terminate end, but in meter it has. So this joining together of
Íeet is understood to belong to both rhythm and meter, but
in one case it is infinite, in the other finite.

M. Then one foot is not a meter.

D. Not at all.

M. What about a foot and a half?

D. That isn't, either.

M. Why? Is it because meter is made of feet, and that can't
be called feet where there is less than two?

D. That's it.

M. Then let's look at those meters I recited a while back
and see what feet they consist of, for it's no longer right you
should be untrained in discerning this sort of thing. They
were:

Ite igitur Camoenae
Fonticolae puellae,
Quae canitis sub antris
Mellifluos sonores.

I think these are enough for what I intend. Measure them,
now, and tell me what feet they consist of.

D. Y am altogether unable to do it. I believe those feet are
to be measured that can be legitimately put together, and I
can't see my way out of this. For if I should make the first
a choree, an iamb follows, equal in times, but not the same
in beat. And if I should make the first a dactyl, nothing fol-
lows even equal in time. If a choriamb, there's the same dif-
ficulty, for what's left over doesn't agree with it either in time
254 SAINT AUGUSTINE

or beat. Then, either this is not meter or what we said about
the joining together of feet is false. For I don’t see what else
I can say.

(16) M. And by the ear’s judgment it is certainly proved
to be meter, both because it is more than one foot and because
it has a determinate ending. For it would not sound with
such sweet equality or be beaten with such a skillfully adjusted
motion, if there were not some numerical quality in it proper
only to this part of music. But I am surprised you think false
those things we decided on, for nothing is surer than numbers,
or more orderly than the recitation and placing of feet. For
we have seen whatever is expressed in the nowise deceptive
ratio of numbers is capable of delighting the ear and dominat-
ing rhythm. But rather listen as I keep repeating Quae canitis
sub antris, and charm your senses with its numerical quality.
What difference is there between this and what results from
the adding of a short syllable also repeated in this same way,
Quae canitis sub antrisve?

D. To my ears both seem to flow agreeably. Yet I am forced
to admit the second you added a short syllable to occupies
more space and time, if it has been made longer.

M. And when I repeat the first, Quae canitis sub antris, in
such a way I don’t stop at all after the ending? Do you ex-
perience the same pleasure?

D. I don’t know what sort of hitch it is here offending me
unless perhaps you drew out that last syllable more than other
long ones.

M. Then do you think either what is more extended or
what is given as a rest [siletur]* have both a time-value?

D. How can it be otherwise?

3 The doctrine of rests and their wide use are not just Augustinian
novelties as many have thought, but they are traditional rhythmical
ON MUSIC 255

Chapter 8

(17) M. You are right. But tell me what interval you
think there is.

D. It’s very hard to measure.

M. That’s true. But doesn't that extra short syllable seem
to measure it? And when we added it on, doesn’t it seem your
senses didn’t demand any unusual lengthening of the last long
or any rest [silentium] as the meter was repeated?

D. I entirely agree. For while you were just reciting and re-
peating the first, I was repeating the second after you to
myself in the same way. And so, since my last short exactly
fitted your rest, I sensed the same time-interval occurs in both.

M. Then you must hold there are fixed rest-intervals in
meters. And so when you have found some defect in a regular
foot, you ought to consider whether there will be compensa-
tion when the rest has been measured and accounted for.

D. 1 now understand that. Go on.

(18) M. It seems to me we ought now to examine the
measurement of rest itself. For in this meter where we found
the bacchius after the choriamb, the ear very easily sensed the
one time’s lack to make it six like the choriamb, and forced
us, in repetition, to interpose a rest length of a short syllable.
But if a spondee should be placed after the choriamb, on re-
peating it we have to cross a two-time rest, as in this case,

and musical elements. Thus in Aristides: ‘An empty time is one with-
out sound for the filling out of the rhythm. A leimma in rhythm is
the least empty time; a prothesis is a long empty time, double the
least’ (op.cit. 40-41) .

Amerio reports two other places. One is the Paris Fragment where
the word for rest is sidpesis. The other is in the scholiast of Hephaes-
tion and worth quoting: Heliodorus says that a footdivision in
paeons is perfectly regular practice, so that the rest gives a time,
makes the rhythmical unit six-timed and in a 1 to 1 ratio like the
others.’ See Amerio, op. cit. 177 n.l.
256 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Quae canitis fontem. For I believe you now feel there ought
to be a rest, for the beat not to hit amiss when we return to the
beginning. But in order for you to experience the time of this
rest, add a long syllable to have, for example, Quae canitis
fontem vos, and repeat this with the beat. You will see the
beat occupies as much time as it did before, although in the
first case two longs are placed after the choriamb, in the other
three. And so it appears a two-time rest is put in there. But if
an iamb is placed after the choriamb, as, for example, Quae
canitis locos, we are forced to a three-time rest. To experience
it, the times are added either by means of another iamb or by
a choree or by a tribrach, to have, for example, either Quae
canitis locos bonos or Quae canitis locos monte or Quae canitis
locos nemore. For since with these added an harmonious and
equable repetition moves on without a rest, and since with the
beat applied each of these three is found to occupy just such
a time-interval as with a rest, evidently there is a three-time
rest there. Again, one long syllable can be put after the chor-
iamb to give a four-time rest. For the choriamb can also be
divided so as to have an arsis and thesis in a one-two ratio.
An example of this meter is Quae canitis res. And if you add
to this either two longs, or a long and two shorts, or a short
and a long, and a short, or two shorts and a long, or four
shorts, you will fill out a six-time foot bearing repetition with-
out need of a rest. Such are Quae canitis res pulchras, Quae
canitis res in bona, Quae canitis res bonumve, Quae canitis
res teneras, and Quae canitis res modo bene. With these things
known and agreed to, I believe it is already evident enough
to you there cannot be a rest less than one time or more than
four. For this is that very same measured progression so much
has already been said about. And in any foot no arsis or thesis
takes more than four times.
ON MUSIC 257

(19) And so when something is sung or recited having
a determinate ending, more than one foot, and a natural
motion pleasing the senses by a certain equableness even be-
fore consideration of the numbers involved, then it is already
meter. For though it should have less than two feet, yet be-
cause it exceeds one foot and forces a rest, it is not without
measure, but what is needed for filling cut the times is owing
the second foot. Instead of two feet, the ear accepts what
occupies the times of two feet up to the return to the beginning
of the foot, with the fixed and measured silence of the interval
also counted out by sound. But I want you to tell me now
whether you understand and agree with what has been said.

D. I understand and agree.

M. Do you simply believe, or do you see for yourself they
are true?

D. For myself certainly, although it's from your talk I know
they are true.

Chapter 9

(20) M. Come, then, since we have now found out
where meter starts, let's also find out where it ends. For meter
begins with two feet, either filled by sound, or to be filled with
whatever the numericaly determined silence lacks. And there-
Íore you must now consider that fourfold progression, and tell
me to what number of feet we ought to extend meter.

D. That is certainly easy. For reason teaches eight feet are
enough.

M. Well, do you remember we said that is called a verse by
the learned consisting of two members joined and measured
in fixed ratio?

D. I remember it well.

M. Then, since it was not said a verse consists of two feet,
out of two members, and since it is clear a verse hasn't one
258 SAINT AUGUSTINE

foot but several, doesn’t this very fact indicate a member is
longer than a foot?

D. So it does.

M. But if the members of a verse are equal, can’t the order
be inverted so, without distinction, the first part becomes the
last, and the last first?

D. I see.

M. Then to keep this from happening and to have one thing
in the verse sufficiently apparent and discernible as the member
it begins with, and another as the member it ends with, we
must admit the members have to be unequal.

D. That's so.

M. Let's consider this first then in the case of the pyrrhic,
if you will, where I believe you have already seen there can't
be a number of less than three times, since that's the first
greater than a foot.

D. I agree.

M. Then how many times will the least verse possess?

D. I would say six, if the inversion you spoke of didn't belie
me. It will have seven then, because a member cannot have
less than three, but to have more is not yet gainsaid it.

M. Your understanding is right. But tell me how many feet
seven times contain.

D. Three and a half.

M. Then a one-time rest is due before the return to the be-
ginning, to fill out the foot’s interval.

D. It is certainly due.

M. How many times will there be when this is counted in?

D. Eight.

M. Then as the least which is the first foot cannot have less
than two times, so the least which is the first verse cannot have
less than eight times.

D. Soit is.
ON MUSIC 259

M. What is the largest verse than which there is no greater
and how many times must there be? Won't you see immediately
if we refer back to that progression so much has been said
about?

D. Now I see a verse can’t be greater than thirty-two times.

(21) M. What about the length of meter? Do you think
it ought to be greater than verse, since the least meter is much
less than the least verse?

D. I do not.

M. Since, then, meter begins with two feet, verse with four,
or the first with a two-foot interval, the second with four if
the rest is counted in, but since meter does not exceed eight
feet, doesn't verse, being also meter, necessarily not exceed too
that same number of feet?

D. That is so.

M. Again, since verse can't be longer than thirty-two times,
and since meter is a length of verse if it does not have a con-
junction of two members such as is the rule in verse, but is
only closed with a determinate ending, and since it must not
be longer than verse, isn't it evident just as verse should not
exceed eight feet so meter should not exceed thirty-two times?

D. I agree.

M. There will be, then, a same time-interval and a same
number of feet both in verse and meter, and a certain common
limit beyond which neither should progress, although meter
is bounded by a fourfold number of times for its beginning,
and verse by a fourfold number of feet‘ for its beginning. And
so this quaternary ratio is kept. and meter evidently shares with
verse its manner of expansion in feet, verse with meter in times.

D. I understand and am satisfied, and I am delighted they
agree and are in harmony this way.

41 have interchanged the terms ‘times’ and ‘feet.’
BOOK FOUR

The treatise on meter is continued.

Chapter 1

(1) M. Let's return to the consideration of meter. It
was in connection with its length and expansion I was forced to
talk with you a little on verse which we decided was to be
treated afterwards. But first, tell me if you don't reject the
opinion of poets and their critics, the grammarians, thinking it
of no importance whether the last syllable ending the meter be
short or long.

D. I certainly do. For this doesn't seem rational.

M. Then tell me, please, what pyrrhic meter is shortest.

D. Three shorts.

M. What quantity must the rest be when it is repeated?

D. One time, the length of one short syllable.

M. Come now, carry this meter through, not by voice but
by beat.

D. I have.

M. Then beat out the anapest this way, too.

D. I have also done that.

M. What's the difference?

D. None at all.

M. Well, can you give the cause?

D. It seems clear enough. For what is ascribed to the rest
in one is ascribed to the lengthening of the last syllable in the
other. For the short syllable in the one case is given the same
beat as the long in the other, and after an equal interval there

260
ON MUSIC 261

is a return to the beginning. But, in the first case there is a stop
to fill the space of a pyrrhic foot; in the second, to fill that of a
long syllable. So in each there is an equal delay before we
return.

M. Then they haven’t been so absurd in saying it makes no
difference whether the last syllable of the meter is long or
short. For the ending is followed by as great a rest as necessary
to finish out the meter. Or do you think in this matter of the
cause they ought to have considered some repetition or return
to the beginning, and not only the fact it ends as if nothing
were to be said after it?

D. I now agree the last syllable must be considered in-
differently.

M. Right. But if this is due to the rest, it being in this way
considered the end as if no sound were to follow it to give it an
ending, and if because of the very large time-span in the rest
it makes no difference what syllable is pronounced there,
doesn’t it follow the very indifference of the last syllable, con-
ceded on account of the large interval, comes to this that
whether there be a long or short syllable there, the ear always
takes it as long?

D. I see that certainly follows.

Chapter 2

(2) M. And when we say the last pyrrhic meter is
three short syllables with a rest for the space of one short before
the return to the beginning, do you see, too, there is no differ-
ence between repeating this meter and repeating anapests?

D. I already saw this a while ago in the beat.

M. Don’t you think the confusion here ought to be separated
out by some ratio?

D. I certainly do.
262 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. Tell me, do you find any ratio to distinguish them ex-
cept the pyrrhic meter in three shorts is not a minimum as it
seemed, but in five? For the similarity of the anapest doesn’t
allow us, after a foot and a half, to rest for the space of the
half necessary to fill out the foot and so to return to the begin-
ning, and to establish this as the minimum pyrrhic meter.
Therefore, if we wish to avoid confusion, that one time is to
be taken as a rest at the end of two and a half feet.

D. But why aren’t two pyrrhics the minimum meter in pyr-
rhics, and rather four short syllables without a rest than five
with a rest?

M. Quite on the lookout, but you aren’t noticing the pro-
celeusmatic forbids this just as the anapest did the other.

D. You are right.

M. Do you agree, then, to this measure in five shorts and a
one-time rest?

D. I certainly do.

M. Well, it seems to me you have quite forgotten the method
we set up for discerning whether a rhythm was running in
pyrrhics or proceleumatics.

D. You are right in warning me, for we found these num-
bers were to be distinguished from each other by beat. And so
in this case I am no longer afraid of the proceleusmatic, for I
can distinguish it from the pyrrhic when the beat is applied.

M. Why didn't you see this same beat is to be applied to
distinguish the anapest from those three shorts or pyrrhic and
a half, followed by a one-time rest?

D. Now I understand, and I go back and confirm the least
pyrrhic meter as three syllables occupying with an added rest
the time of two pyrrhics.

M. Then your ears approve this sort of number: Si aliqua,
Bene vis, Bene dic, Bene fac, Animus, Si aliquid, Male vis,
Male dic, Male fac, Animus, Medium est.
ON MUSIC 263

D. They do, especially when I now remember how they are
to be beaten out so anapests aren’t confused with pyrrhic
meter.

(3) M. Consider these, too: Si aliquid es, Age bene, Male
qui agit, Nihil agit, Et ideo, Miser erit.

D. These too run harmoniously, except in one place, where
the end of the third is joined with the beginning of the fourth.

M. That's just what I wanted of your ears. It's not for
nothing they are offended, since they expect one time each for
all syllables and no rests between. But the concourse of two
consonants, "^ and 'n, immediately cheat this expectation,
forcing the preceding vowel to be long and extending it to two
times. And the grammarians call this kind a syllable long by
position. But because of that famous indifference of the last
syllable no one incriminates this meter, even though unspoiled
and exacting ears condemn it without benefit of an accuser.
For see, if you will, the difference there is, if for Male qui agit,
Nihil agit you should say Male qui agit, Homo perit.

D. This is quite clear and right.

M. Then, for the sake of musical purity let us observe what
the poets do not observe for the facility of composing. So, for
example, as often as we must put in meters where nothing is
owing the foot to be compensated by a rest, so often do we
put those syllables last the law of that number absolutely de-
mands, so as not to return from the end to the beginning with
offense to the ear and falsity of measure. But we concede, of
course, there are meters ending as if nothing were to be said
following them, and in that case they may treat the last syllable
as either long or short with impunity. For in a succession of
meters they are clearly convicted of error by the ear's judg-
ment that no syllable is to be placed last except by the law and
264 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ratio of the meter itself. But this succession exists when nothing

is owing the foot to force a rest.

D. I understand, and am thankful you promise examples

of the kind giving the senses no offense.

Chapter 3

(4) M. Come, now report on the pyrrhics too, in order:

Quid erit homo
Qui amat hominem,
Si amat in eo
Fragile quod est?
Amet igitur
Animum hominis,
Et erit homo
Aliquid amans.

How do these seem to you?

D. Why, to flow very smoothly and vigorously.

M. What about these:
Bonus erit amor,
Anima bona sit:
Amor inhabitat,
Et anima domus.
Ita bene habitat,
Ubi bona domus;
Ubi mala, male.

D. I also find these follow along smoothly.
M. Now three and a half feet, see:
Animus hominis est
Mala bonave agitans.
Bona voluit, habet;
Mala voluit, habet.
ON MUSIC 265

D. These, too, are enjoyable with a one-time rest put in.
M. Four full pyrrhics follow; listen to them and judge:
Animus hominis agit
Ut habeat ea bona,
Quibus inhabitet homo,
Nihil ibi metuitur.

D. In these, too, there is a fixed and agreeable measure.
M. Listen now to nine short syllables, listen and judge:
Homo malus amat et eget;
Malus etenim ea bona amat,
Nihil ubi satiat eum.
D. Now try five pyrrhics.
M. Levicula fragilia bona,
Qui amat homo, similiter habet.

D. That's enough; they pass. Now add a half-foot.
M. I shall.
Vaga levia fragilia bona
Qui amat homo, similis erit eis.
D. Very well: now I am waiting for six pyrrhics.
M. Then listen to these:
Vaga levicula fragilia bona,
Qui adamat homo, similis erit eis.
D. That's enough; add another half-foot.
Fluida levicula fragilia bona
Quae adamat anima, similis erit eis.
D. 'That's enough, and very good; now give seven pyrrhics.
M. Levicula fragilia gracilia bona
Quae adamat animula, similis erit eis.

D. Add a half-foot to these, for this is all very fine.
266 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Μ. Vaga fluida levicula fragilia bona,
Quae adamat animula, fit ea similis eis.

D. Now I see the eight-foot lines remain before we can get
beyond these trifles. For, although the ear approves, by a
natural measuring, what you give out in sound, yet I shouldn’t
wish you to look for so many short syllables. And, if I am not
mistaken, they are more difficult to find woven in a succession
of words than if some longs could be mixed in.

M. You are quite right, and to show my gratitude at our
being allowed to get this far I shall compose the one remaining
meter of this kind with a more joyful sentence:

Solida bona bonus amat, et ea qui amat, habet.
Itaque nec eget amor, et ea bona Deus est.

D. I now have with abundance a complete set of pyrrhic
meters. The iambics come next; two examples of each meter
are enough. And it is pleasant to hear them without
interruption.

Chapter 4

(5) M. Tl obey you. But how many kinds have we al-
ready gone through?

D. Fourteen.

M. How many iambic meters do you think there are too?

D. Also fourteen.

M. What if I should wish in these meters to substitute a
tribrach for an iamb, wouldn’t the variety of forms be greater?

D. That’s very evident. But, not to be too long, I want to
hear these examples only in iambics. For it’s easy art to sub-
stitute two shorts for any long.

M. I shall do as you wish, and I’m thankful your keen in-
telligence lessens my labor. But listen now to the iambics.

D. I am listening; begin.
ON MUSIC 267

M. Bonus vir
Beatus.

Malus miser,
Sibi est malum.

Bonus beatus,
Deus bonum eius.

Bonus beatus est,
Deus bonum eius est.

Bonus vir est beatus,
Videt Deum beate.

Bonus vir, et sapit bonum,
Videns Deum beatus est.
Deum videre qui cupiscit
Bonusque vivit, hic videbit.
Bonum videre, qui cupit diem,
Bonus sit hic, videbit et Deum.

Bonum videre qui cupit diem illum,
Bonus sit hic, videbit et Deum illic.

Beatus est bonus fruens enim est Deo,
Malus miser, sed ipse poena fit sua.

Beatus est videns Deum, nihil cupit plus,
Malus bonum foris requirit, hinc egestas.

Beatus est videns Deum, nihil boni amplius,
Malus bonum foris requirit, hinc eget miser.

Beatus est videns Deum, nihil boni amplius vult,
Malus foris bonum requirit, hinc egenus errat.

1 There is a misprint in the Migne Edition which has been corrected
according to the Benedictine ition.
268 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Beatus est videns Deum, nihil boni amplius volet,
Malus foris bonum requirit, hinc eget miser bono.

Chapter 5

(6) D. The trochee is next; give the trochaic meters,
for these are the best.
M. I shall, and in the same way as the iambic:
Optimi
Non egent.
Veritate,
Non egetur.

Veritas sat est,

Semper haec manet.
Veritas vocatur

Ars Dei supremi.

Veritate factus est
Mundus iste quem vides.
Veritate facta cuncta
Quaeque gignier videmus.
Veritate facta cuncta sunt,
Omniumque forma veritas.

Veritate cuncta facta cerno,
Veritas manet, moventur ista.

Veritate facta cernis omnia,

Veritas manet, moventur omnia.
Veritate facta cernis ista cuncta,
Veritas tamen manet, moventur ista.

Veritate facta cuncta cernis optime,
Veritas manet, moventur haec, sed ordine.
ON MUSIC 269

Veritate facta cuncta cernis ordinata,
Veritas manet, novans movet quod innovatur.

Veritate facta cuncta sunt, et ordinata sunt,
Veritas novat manens, moventur ut noventur haec.

Veritate facta cuncta sunt, et ordinata cuncta,
Veritas manens novat, moventur ut noventur ista.

Chapter 6

(7) D. The spondee clearly follows; I have had enough
of trochees.
M. Here are the spondaic meters:
Magnorum est,
Libertas.
Magnum est munus
Libertatis.
Solus liber fit,
Qui errorem vincit.
Solus liber vivit,
Qui errorem iam vicit.
Solus liber vere fit,
Qui erroris vinclum vicit.
Solus liber vere vivit,
Qui erroris vinclum iam vicit.
Solus liber non falso vivit,
Qui erroris vinclum iam devicit.
Solus liber iure ac vere vivit,
Qui erroris vinclum magnus devicit.
Solus liber iure ac non falso vivit,
Qui erroris vinclum funestum devicit.
270 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Solus liber iure ac vere magnus vivit,
Qui erroris vinclum funestum iam devicit.

Solus liber iure ac non falso magnus vivit,
Qui erroris vinclum funestum prudens devicit.

Solus liber iure ac non falso securus vivit,
Qui erroris vinclum funestum prudens iam devicit.

Solus liber iure ac non falso securus iam vivit,
Qui erroris vinclum tetrum ac funestum prudens devicit.

Solus liber iure ac non falso securam vitam vivit,
Qui erroris vinclum tetrum ac funestum prudens iam devicit.

Chapter 7

(8) D. I have all the spondees I need; let's go to the
tribrach.

M. All right. But since all four of the preceding feet have
each given birth to fourteen meters, making fifty-six all told,
more are to be expected from the tribrach. For when there is
a half-foot rest in those fifty-six, the rest is never more than à
syllable. But in the case of the tribrach you certainly don't
think the rests are only for the space of a short syllable, or do
you think there are also rests for the space of two short syll-
ables? For there is a double division here, you know, since tlie
tribrach either begins with one short and ends with two, or
begins with two and ends with one. And so it must generate
twenty-one meters.

D. 'That's very true. For they begin with four times and,
therefore, a two-time rest; then five times with a one-time rest;
third, six times with no rest; fourth, seven with a two-time
rest; then eight with a one-time rest; sixth, nine with no rest.
And so, when they are added on one by one until you come to
ON MUSIC 271

twenty-four syllables or eight tribrachs, there are twenty-one
meters all told.

M. You have certainly very readily followed reason here.
But do you think we ought to give examples of all of them, or
ought we to think those we have given for the first four feet
will furnish light enough for the rest?

D. In my opinion, they are sufficient.

M. I only need yours, now. But, since you already know
very well how with a change of beat tribrachs can be forged
out of pyrrhic meters, tell me whether the first pyrrhic meter
can also have a tribrach meter.

D. It cannot, for the meter must be greater than the foot.

M. How about the second?

D. It can, for four shorts are two pyrrhics and a tribrach
and a half, so in the one case there is no rest and in the other a
two-time rest.

M. Then with a change of beat the pyrrhics give you ex-
amples of tribrachs up to sixteen syllables or five and a half
tribrachs. And you will have to be content with that, for you
can compose the others yourself either by voice or beat, if you
still think these numbers ought to be explored by the sensible
ear.

D. In any case I shall do as seems best. Let's see about the
others.

Chapter 8

(9) M. The dactyl is next, and divisible only one way,
isn't it?

D. Certainly.

M. What part of it, then, can be given as a rest?

D. Why, the half.

M. Well, if someone should put a trochee after a dactyl and
want to have a one-time rest in the form of a short syllable to
272 SAINT AUGUSTINE

fill out the dacytl, what shall we say? For we can’t say it’s
impossible to have a rest of less than a half-foot. For that
reason we've discussed convinced us there could be no rest, not
of less, but more than a half-foot. For there is certainly a rest
of less than a half-foot in the choriamb, when a bacchius
follows it, and an example of this is Fonticolae puellae. For,
you know, we have here a short-syllable rest, needed to fill out
the six times.

D. That’s true.

M. Then, when a trochee follows a dactyl, isn’t it also per-
missible to have a one-time rest?

D. I am forced to admit it.

M. Yet who could have forced you, if you had only re-
membered what has been said? You are in this plight because
you forgot the demonstration about the indifference of the last
syllable, and how the ear takes upon itself a final long syllable
even if it's short, when there's an interval to prolong it in.

D. Now I understand. For, if the ear takes the final short
syllable as long when there's a rest as we found out by that
reason discussed with examples, then it will make no difference
whether a trochee or spondee is pronounced after the dactyl.
And so, when the repetition is to be punctuated by a rest, it is
proper to place a long syllable, to have a two-time rest.

M. What if a pyrrhic should be put after a dactyl? Do you
think it would be right to do so?

D. It would not. Whether a pyrrhic or an iamb, there is no
difference; although it must be taken for an iamb because
with the rest the ear makes the last syllable long. But every one
knows it's not proper for an iamb to be put after a dactyl be-
cause of the difference in the arsis and thesis, neither of these
in the dactyl having three times.
ON MUSIC 273

Chapter 9

(10) M. Very good and to the point. But what do you
think about the anapest? Or does the same reason hold?

D. Exactly the same.

M. Then, let's consider the bacchius, if you will, and tell
me what its first meter is.

D. I think it is four syllables, one short and three longs: two
longs belonging to the bacchius, but the last one to begin the
foot properly placed with the bacchius, with a rest to make
up for what is lacking. Yet I should like to explore this with
my ear in some example or other.

M. It is easy to give examples, and yet I don't think you
could be so delighted with these as with those just given. For
these five-time feet, and the seven-time ones, too, do not flow
so smoothly as those divided either into equal parts, or into
one and two or two and one, so great is the difference between
the sesquate movements and the equal or complicate move-
ments we talked about so much in our first discussion. And so,
just as the poets treat these five- and seven-time feet contemp-
tuously, so prose adopts them more happily than others. And
this can be easily seen in the examples you asked for. Such is
Laborat magister docens tardos. Repeat this with a three-time
rest in between. And for you to feel it more easily, I have put
a long syllable after the three feet because it is the beginning of
the cretic, which can be put with the bacchius. And I haven't
given you an example of the first meter, of four syllables,
lest one foot wouldn't be enough to impress on your senses how
much of a rest should follow the one foot and a long. Listen
now, I shall give it and repeat it myself so you may feel the
three times in the rest: Labor nullus, Amor magnus.

D. It is evident enough these feet are more suitable to prose,
and there is no need to go through the others with examples.
274 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. You are right. But when there’s to be a rest, you don’t
think only a long syllable can be put after the bacchius?

D. Certainly not. Also a short and a long, the first half-foot
of the bacchius itself. For, if we were allowed to begin a cretic
on the grounds it can be put with a bacchius, how much more
will we be allowed to do it with the bacchius itself, and espe-
cially since we did not even put all that part of the cretic
equal in times to the first part of the bacchius.

Chapter 10

(11) M. Now, then, if you will, go through the rest
yourself, while I listen and judge, and in all those feet, where
the left-over is filled in by a rest, describe what is placed after
the full foot.

D. What you ask is very short and easy now, I believe. For
what has been said of the bacchius can also be said of the
second pacon. But after the cretic it is permissible to put one
long syllable, and an iamb, and a spondee, so there is a rest
either of three times, or two, or one. And this applies also to
the first and last paeon. After the antibacchius may be placed
either one long syllable or a spondee, and so in this meter there
will be a three-time or a one-time rest. The same thing is true
of the third paeon. Certainly, wherever a spondee can properly
be put, there also an anapest. But after the molossus, because
of its division, we put one long syllable with a four-time rest,
or two longs with a two-time rest. But since, both by experience
and reason it has been ascertained all six-time feet can be
ordered with the molossus, there will be a place after it both
Íor the iamb with a three-time rest, for the cretic with a one-
time rest, and in the same way for the bacchius. But if we re-
solve the cretic's first long and the bacchius' second long into
two shorts, there will be a place for the fourth paeon too. And
ON MUSIC 275

what I have said of the molossus, I could also say of the other
six-time feet. Now I think the proceleusmatic is to be referred
back to the other four-time feet, except when we place three
shorts after it. And this is the same as putting an anapest after
it, because of the final syllable habitually taken as long when
followed by a rest. And the iamb is rightly subordinated to
the first epitrite and so also the bacchius, cretic, and fourth
paeon. And let the same be said of the second epitrite so there
is either a four-time or two-time rest. But the spondee and
molossus can properly follow the other two epitrites, on the
condition it is possible to resolve the spondee’s first long and
the molossus' first or second into two shorts. Therefore, in
these meters there will be either a three-time or one-time rest.
The dispondee is left. If we should put a spondee after it,
there will be four times to rest; if a molossus, two, and there
remains the possibility of dissolving a long into two shorts
either in the spondee or molossus, with the exception of the
final long syllable. You have what you wanted me to run
through. Perhaps you have corrections.

Chapter 11

(12) M. Not I certainly, but you, when you put
your ear to judging the matter. Tell me, when I say or beat
this meter, Verus optimus, and this one, Verus optimorum,
and this one, Veritatis inops, whether your senses receive the
third as happily as the other two. And they will judge this
easily by your repeating them and beating them with the
necessary rests.

D. They clearly receive the first two with pleasure, but not
the last.

M. Then it's not right to put an iamb after a dichoree.
D. So it isn't.
276 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. But when he has repeated the following meters with a
proper regard for the interposing of rests, everyone agrees it
can be put after the other six-time feet:

Fallacem cave,
Male castum cave,
Multiloquum cave,
Fallaciam cave,

Et invidum cave,
Et infirmum cave.

D. I understand what you say, and I agree.

M. See, too, if there isn't a hitch when this last meter, re-
peated with a two-time rest interposed, continues on, unequal.
For it wouldn't sound like the following, would it?

Veraces regnant.
Sapientes regnant.
Veriloqui regnant.
Prudentia regnant.
Boni in bonis regnant.
Pura cuncta regnant.

D. These last have an even and agreeable sound, but that
other was quite awkward.

M. Then we shall hold, in meters of six-time feet the di-
choree is dissonant with the iamb, and the antispast with the
spondee.

D. We certainly shall.

(13) M. Well, can’t you put your finger on the cause if
you notice a foot is so divided into two parts by the arsis and
thesis that, if it has any middle syllable, either one or two, they
are either attributed to the first part or second part or divided
between them both?

D. I certainly know this, and it’s true. But what's the point?
ON MUSIC 277

M. Listen, then, to what I am going to say; then you will
see more easily what you are looking for. For I suppose it is
clear to you there are some feet without middle syllables, like
the pyrrhic and other two-syllable feet; others, where the mid-
dle agrees in length with the first part or last part, or both,
or neither. With the first part as in the case of the anapest or
antibacchius or first paeon; with the last part as in the case
of the dactyl or bacchius or fourth paeon; with both as in the
case of the tribrach or molossus or choriamb or any ionic; with
neither as in the case of the cretic or second and third paeons,
or diiamb or dichoree or antispast. For in those feet capable
of division into three equal parts, the middle is in accord with
the first and last parts. But in those not capable of such divi-
sion the middle is in accord with the first part only, or with
the last, or with neither.

D. And I know this, too, and I am waiting to see where it
all leads.

M. Why to this point, of course: the iamb with a rest is
improperly placed after the dichoree because its middle part
is equal neither to the first part nor to the last, and so is not in
accord with the arsis and thesis, The same thing is true in the
case of the spondee, similarly ill at ease when placed with a
rest after the antispast. Have you anything to say to the
contrary?

D. Nothing, except the shock the ear feels when these feet
are so placed is in comparison with the sweetness diverting it
when these feet along with a rest are placed after the other six-
time feet. For if without the others you were to give examples
and ask me how the iamb sounded after the dichoree or the
spondee after the antispast, accompanied by a rest in each
case—to say what I feel, I shoutd perhaps approve and praise
them.

M. And I don’t contradict you. It’s enough for me, how-
278 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ever, these arrangements offend in comparison with numbers
of the same kind, but more consonant as you say. For they are
to be rejected from the fact that, since these feet we admit
run on more happily end in the same half-feet, and are of the
same kind, there should have been no discrepancy between
them. But don’t you think in line with this reasoning an iamb
with a rest shouldn’t be put after the second epitrite? For in
the case of this foot, too, the iamb occupies the middle in such
a way it is equal neither to the times of the first part nor of
the second.

D. This reasoning compels my agreeing to that.

Chapter 12

(14) M. Come now, give me, if you will, an account
of all the meters we have discussed, that is, of those begin-
ning with full feet of their own with no rests interposed in
the cyclic return, or with feet not full, followed by a rest, but
such as reason has shown to be in harmony. And the number of
them begins with two incomplete feet and goes as far as eight
complete ones in such a way however, as not to exceed, thirty-
two times.

D. What you impose is laborious, yet it is worth the work.
But I remember a little while ago we had already gotten to
seventy-seven meters in going from the pyrrhic to the tribrach.
For the two-syllable feet each produced fourteen, making all
together fifty-six. But the tribrach, because of its two-way di-
vision, produced twenty-one. Then to these seventy-seven we
add fourteen from the dactyl and as many from the anapest.
For the full feet, when arranged without rests, go from two to
eight feet and produce seven meters, but when the half-feet
are added with rests and the meters begin with one foot and
a half and go to seven and a half, there are seven more. And
ON MUSIC 279

now there are all together one hundred and five. But the
bacchius cannot stretch its meter to eight feet, lest it exceeed
the thirty-two times, nor can any of the five-time feet, but they
can go to six. The bacchius, then, and the second paeon, equal
to it not only in times but also in division, produce each five
meters going from two to six feet when the full feet are ordered
without rests; but with rests, beginning with a foot and a half
and going to five and a half feet, they produce five meters
each when followed by a long, and likewise five each when
followed by a short and a long. And so they produce each
fifteen meters, or thirty all told. And now all together there
are a hundred and thirty-five meters. But the cretic and the
first and fourth paeons, being divided in the same way, can
be followed by a long and an iamb and a spondee and an
anapest, and therefore come to seventy-five meters. For, since
there are three of them, they each produce five without rests,
but twenty with rests, making a total, as we said, of seventy-
five. And this, added to the former sum, makes two hundred
and ten. The antibacchius and the third paeon, alike in divi-
sion, each produce five meters in the case of full feet without
rests, but with rests they produce five meters each when fol-
lowed by a long, five each by a spondee, five each by an ana-
pest. We add these to the last sum, and we have in all two
hundred and fifty meters.

(15) The molossus and the other six-time feet, seven in
all, each produce four meters with full feet, but with rests,
since they can be followed each one by a long or an iamb or
spondee or anapest or bacchius or cretic or fourth paeon, they
each produce twenty-eight, or a total of a hundred and ninety-
six meters. And these, added to the four each, make two hun-
dred and twenty-four. But eight must be subtracted from this
sum, because the iamb doesn’t properly follow the dichoree
280 SAINT AUGUSTINE

nor the spondee the antispast. That leaves two hundred and
sixteen, and this added to the whole sum makes all together
four hundred and sixty-six meters. The ratio of the proceleus-
matic cannot be considered along with those it agrees with,
on account of the greater number of half-feet placed after
it. For one long syllable with a rest can be put after it just as
after the dactyl and the feet like it to give a two-time rest, and
three shorts to give a one-time rest. And the final short can in
this way be taken for a final long. The epitrites each produce
three meters with full feet, beginning with a two-foot meter
and going as far as a four-foot meter. For if you should add
a fifth foot, you would exceed the allotted thirty-two times.
But with rests the first and second epitrites produce three
meters each when followed by an iamb, three each when
followed by a bacchius, three each by a cretic, and three each
by a fourth paeon. And with the full meters this makes all told
thirty. But the third and fourth epitrites each produce three
meters before the introduction of rests. With the spondee they
each produce three, with the anapest three, with the molossus
three, with the lesser ionic three, and with the choriamb three.
And together with the full meters this makes a total of thirty-
six. Therefore, all the epitrites together produce sixty-six me-
ters, and these, with the proceleusmatic’s twenty-one, added
to the former sum makes five hundred and fifty-three. Thare
remains only the dispondee, producing three meters with full
feet; but when rests are used, with the spondee it produces
three, three with the anapest, three with the molossus, three
with the lesser ionic, and three with the choriamb. And this
makes a total of eighteen. So there will be five hundred and
seventy-one meters all told.

Chapter 13
(16) M. There certainly would be if three were not
ON MUSIC 281

to be substracted because of the iamb’s difficulties with be-
ing placed after the second epitrite. But this is all fine. And
so tell me, now, how this meter affects your ear, Triplici vides
ut ortu Triviae rotetur ignis.

D. Very agreeably.

M. Can you tell me the feet it consists of?

D. I can't; I can't find out how any I measure off go
together. For, if I should start with a pyrrhic or an anapest
or a third paeon, those following don't fit in. And I can find
a cretic after a third paeon, leaving a long syllable allowable
after a cretic. But this meter couldn't properly consist of
these with a three-time rest interposed. For there is no rest
when its repetition is pleasing to the ear.

M. See if it shouldn't begin with a pyrrhic followed by a
dichoree, and then a spondee filling out the times owing the
Íoot you started with. Likewise, you can begin with an an-
apest followed by a diiamb, so the final long when placed
with the anapest's four times makes six times, to harmonize
with the diiamb. And so from that you understand it is
permissible for parts of a foot to be placed, not only at the
end, but also at the beginning of meters.

D. I now understand.

(17) M. What if I should take away the final long to
have a meter like this, Segetes meus labor; you notice it's re-
peated with a two-time rest? And so it is clear some part of
the foot can be put at the beginning of the meter, some at
the end, and some in a rest.

D. That's clear.

M. But this is clearly true if you measure off a full dichoree
in this meter. On the other hand, if you should measure off
a diiamb with an anapest at the start, you find a four-time
part of the foot at the beginning, and the two times left due
282 SAINT AUGUSTINE

in a rest at the end. And thus we learn a meter can begin
with a part of a foot ending with a full foot, but never without
a rest.

D. This is very clear.

(18) M. Further, can you measure off this meter, and
tell the feet it consists of?

Iam satis terris nivis, atque dirae
Grandinis misit Pater, et rubente
Dextera sacras iaculatus arces.)

D. I can establish a cretic at the beginning and measure off
the two remaining six-time feet, one a greater ionic, the other
a dichoree, and add a one-time rest to fill out six times with
the cretic.

M. Something is amiss in your consideration. For when the
dichoree is at the end with a rest left over, its last syllable, a
short, is taken for a long. Or do you deny this?

D. 1 certainly admit it.

M. Then a dichoree must not be put at the end if it is to
be followed by a rest in repetition, lest it be perceived no
longer as a dichoree but as a second epitrite.

D. "That's evident.

M. How, then, shall we measure off this meter?

D. I don't know.

Chapter 14

M. Then see if it sounds well when I recite it with a one-
time rest after the first three syllables. For there will be noth-
ing due at the end to keep a dichoree from properly being
there.

2 Horace, Odes L2.13. The ‘traditional’ method of scanning this, that

of Marius Victorinus, is quite different. But Masqueray, Traité de
métrique grecque (Paris 1899) scans as Augustine does.
ON MUSIC 283

D. It sounds very pleasing.

(19) M. Then let's add this rule also to the art, that not
only at the end, but also before the end, there may be rests.
And it must be applied either when what is necessary for filling
out the times of a foot cannot properly be given as a final rest
because of a final short, or when two incomplete feet are es-
tablished, one at the beginning and the other at the end, such
as here, Gentiles nostros inter oberrat equos. For you saw, I
believe, I introduced a two-time rest after the five long syll-
ables, and one of the same léngth must be introduced at
the end, when a cyclic return is made to the beginning. For,
if you should measure off this meter by the six-time law, you
will have first a spondee, second a molossus, third a choriamb,
fourth an anapest. Therefore, two times are due the spondee
in order to complete a six-time foot. And so there is a two-
time rest after the molossus and before the end, and again
after the anapest, and at the end. But, if you measure it off
by the four-time law, there will be a long syllable at the begin-
ning, then we measure off two spondees, then two dactyls,
and it will finish with a long. And so we have a two-time rest
after the two spondees and before the end, and again at the
end in order to fill out both of those feet whose halves have
been placed at the beginning and the end.

(20) Yet sometimes, what is due two incomplete feet,
placed one at the beginning the other at the end, is rendered

by the final rest alone, if it be of such a quantity as not to
exceed the half-foot, as in the case of these two,

Silvae laborantes, geluque
Flumina constiterint acuto.

For the first of these begins with an antibacchius, from there

3 Horace, Odes 1.9.3-4.
284 SAINT AUGUSTINE

runs into a molossus, and ends in a bacchius. And so there
is a two-time rest, and when you have given one of these to
the bacchius and the other to the antibacchius, the six-time
intervals will everywhere be filled. But the second begins with
a dactyl, from there goes into a choriamb, and closes with a
bacchius. It will then be necessary to have a three-time rest.
Out of that we shall give one time to the bacchius and two
to the dactyl, so there will be six times in every foot.

(21) But what is due for filling out the last foot is given
before that due for the first foot. Our ears don’t allow it to
be otherwise. And no wonder. For when we repeat, what
comes last is certainly joined with what comes first. And so
in the meter we gave, Flumina constiterint acuto, since three
times are due to fill out the six-time intervals, if you should
wish to give them, not with a rest but with words, they could
be rendered by an iamb, choree, or tribrach because each of
these contains three times. But the senses themselves would
not allow them to be rendered by the choree where the first
syllable is long; the second, short. For that first ought to sound,
due the last bacchius, that is, the short syllable; not the
long belonging to the first dactyl. This can be seen in these
examples:

Flumina constiterint acuto gelu.
Flumina constiterint acute gelida.
Flumina constiterint in alta nocte.

And it is evident to anyone the first two are proper when
repeated, but the last one not at all.

(22) Likewise, when a single time is due each incomplete
foot, if you want to render them by word, the senses don’t
allow them to be compressed into one syllable. Quite justly,
of course. For it is not proper for what is to be rendered sep-
ON MUSIC 285

arately not to be constructed separately. And, therefore, in
the meter Silvae laborantes geluque, if you should add a long
syllable to the end in place of the rest, as in Silvae laborantes
gelu duro, your ears do not approve as when we say Silvae
laborantes gelu et frigore. And you perceive this well enough,
when you repeat each one.

(23) Likewise, when there are two incomplete feet, it
is not proper a greater be put at the beginning than at the
end. For the hearing condemns this, too, for example, if you
should say Optimum tempus adest tandem with the first foot
a cretic, the second a choriamb, and the third a spondee,
with the result that we have a three-time rest, two times
being due the last spondee for filling out the six, and one to
the first cretic. And so, if it should be said in this way,
Tandem tempus adest optimum, with the same three-time
rest, who would not find its repetition most enjoyable? And,
therefore, it is proper either the final incomplete foot be of
the same quantity as the first one, as in Silvae laborantes
geluque; or the first one be the smaller and the last one the
larger, as in Flumina constiterint acuto. And this is not ar-
bitrary, because on the one hand there is no discord where
there is equality. But where the number is unequal, if we
should come from the less to the greater, as is usual in count-
ing, this very order again effects an accord.

(24) And so it also follows, when these incomplete feet
just. mentioned are put in, if a rest is interposed in two places,
that is, before the end and at the end, then there is a rest
before the end of a quantity owing the last foot, but a rest at
the end of a quantity owing the first foot. For, the middle tends
toward the end, but a return is to be made from the end to
the beginning. But, if to each the same amount is owing, there
is no dispute, and in this case there must be a rest before the
286 SAINT AUGUSTINE

end of the same quantity as at the end. Moreover, there must
be no rest except where there is an end to a part of the dis-
course. In the case of those numbers not made by words,
but by some beat or breath or even by the tongue, there is no
way to make the distinction after what sound or beat a rest
should come, so a legitimate rest may intervene according to
the preceding ratios. And, therefore, a meter also can begin
with two incomplete feet, on condition the combined quanti-
ties of both should not be less than one foot and a half. For we
have already affirmed two incomplete feet are properly inserted
when what is due both does not exceed the length of a half
foot. An example is Montes acuti, so either we have a three-
time rest, or a one-time rest after the spondee with a two-time
rest at the end. For this meter cannot be properly measured
otherwise.

Chapter 15

(25) Let this [prescription], too, be part of the dis-
cipline: when we have a rest before the end, that part of
the discourse may not end in a short syllable, to keep the
senses from taking it because of the rest following it, for a
long syllable in accordance with the continually repeated rule
to that effect. And so in the meter Montibus acutis we cannot
make a one-time pause after the dactyl as we could after
the spondee in the example before, for then no longer a
dactyl but a cretic would be perceived, with the result the
meter would not seemingly consist of two incomplete feet, the
object of our present explanation, but a full dichoree and
a final spondee with a two-time rest owing at the end.

(26) And it must be noted, too, when an incomplete foot
is placed at the beginning, what is owing is repaid either in rest
right on the spot, as in Jam satis terris nivis atque dirae; or at
ON MUSIC 287

the end, as in Segetes meus labor. But to an incomplete foot at
the end, what is due is repaid in rest either right on the spot, as
in Ite igitur Camoenae ; or somewhere in the middle, as in Ver
blandum viget arvis, adest hospes hirundo. For the one time
owing the last bacchius can be a rest either after the whole
number, or after the number’s first foot, the molossus, or after
its second, the lesser ionic. But what is owing incomplete feet
in the middle can only be repaid on the spot, as in Tuba ter-
ribilem sonitum dedit aere curvo. For, if we should so measure
out this meter as to make the first an anapest, the second either
of the ionics expressed as five syllables with either the first
or final long resolved into two shorts, the third a choriamb,
the last a bacchius, then there will be three times owing, one
to the final bacchius and two to the first anapest to fill out
the times each ought to have. But this whole three-time
interval can be rendered as a final rest. But, if you should
begin with a complete foot, meting out the first five syllables
for either ionic, then a choriamb follows. From there on you
will not find a complete foot, and so there will have to be
rest for the space of one long syllable; when this is added, the
choriamb will be completed. A bacchius whose last time will
be repaid by a final rest is left to close the meter.

(27) And so I now think it’s clear, when there is a rest
in the middle places, it redeems either those times owing at the
end, or those owing where the pause is made. But sometimes
it is not necessary for the pause to be in the middle places,
since the meter can be measured off another way as in the
example we just gave. But sometimes it is necessary, as in
Vernat temperies, aurae tepent, sunt deliciae. For it is clear
this number runs in either four-time or six-time feet. If in four,
there must be a one time rest after the eighth syllable, and two-
time rest at the end. First, measure off a spondee; second, a
288 SAINT AUGUSTINE

dactyl; third, a spondee; fourth, a dactyl, adding a rest after
the long syllable because it is not proper to do so after the
short syllable; fifth, a spondee; sixth, a dactyl, with a final
long closing the line and its two missing times redeemed by
a rest at the end. But, if we measure off six-time feet, the
first will be a molossus, the second a lesser ionic, the third a
cretic becoming a dichoree when a one-time rest is added,
the fourth a greater ionic, and a final long followed by a four-
time rest. It could be otherwise with one long placed at the
beginning, followed by a lesser ionic, then a molossus, then
a bacchius becoming an antispast when a one-time rest has
been added. A final choriamb would close the meter, with a
four-time rest being given the first long. But the ear rejects
such a measuring, because, unless the part of the foot placed
at the beginning is greater than a half foot, the lack cannot
be properly restored where it is owing by the final rest after the
complete foot. But with other feet inserted, we know how
much is wanting. But the sense does not take in there is such
a long rest, unless there is less owing in the rest than is put
in sound, because, when the voice has traversed the greater
part of the foot, the remaining lesser part easily presents
itself anywhere.

(28) And so, although in the case of the meter we have
just given as an example, Vernat temperies, aurae tepent, sunt
deliciae, there is one necessary measuring if there is a one-
time rest after the tenth syllable and a four-time rest at the
end, yet there is a voluntary measuring if one should wish
to have a two-time rest after the sixth syllable, a one-time
rest after the eleventh, and a two-time rest at the end, re-
sulting in a spondee at the beginning, a choriamb next, third
a spondee with a two-time rest added on to make a molossus
or lesser ionic, fourth a bacchius likewise becoming an antis-
ON MUSIC 289

past by the addition of a one-time rest, fifth a choriamb to
close the number as far as sound is concerned, with a two-time
rest at the end redeeming the first spondee. And likewise there
is another way. For if you wish, you can have a one-time rest
after the sixth syllable, and again after the tenth and eleventh,

nd a two-time rest at the end. With the result the first foot
is a spondee, the second a choriamb, the third an antibacchius
becoming an antispast by the addition of the one-time rest,
the fourth a spondee becoming a dichoree by the insertion
and addition of one-time rests, finally a choriamb closing the
number to give at the end a two-time rest owing the first
spondee. And there is a third way of measuring it, if there
should be a one-time rest after the first spondee with the
other rests just as before except for there being a final one-
time rest because of the usually beginning spondee’s becoming
an antibacchius with the addition of the one-time rest follow-
ing it, with the result only a one-time measure is owing it to
appear as a final rest. And so now you see how rests are
inserted in meters, some necessary, some voluntary: necessary
when something is owing for completing the feet, but volun-
tary when the feet are whole and complete.

(29) But what has just been said about the rule of
avoiding rests of more than four times was said of necessary
rests where times due are filled out. For in those we have
called voluntary rests, it is also proper to sound a foot and
rest a foot. But, if we should do this at equal intervals, there
will not be a meter, but a rhythm with no fixed end appear-
ing as a means to a return to the beginning. And so, if you
should wish, for example, to punctuate a line with rests so
as to pause after the first foot for the length of a foot, this
must not be continued. But it is proper to prolong a meter
up to the legitimate number of times with rests inserted in
290 SAINT AUGUSTINE

any sort of arrangement, as in Nobis verum in promptu est,
tu si verum dicis. It is proper here to have a four-time rest
after the first spondee, and another after the following two,
but no rest after the last three, because the thirty-two times
have already been completed. But it is much more apt, and
somehow more just, there be a rest either only at the end,
or at the end and in the middle, too, and this can be done
with one foot subtracted, to give Nobis verum in promptu est,
tu dic verum. And this rule is to be maintained for meters of
other feet that, in the case of necessary rests the times: due to
fill out the feet ought to be redeemed either by final or middle
rests. But the rest must not be greater than that part of the
foot occupied by either the arsis or thesis. But in the case of
rests by choice it is possible to rest either for the space of a
whole foot or of part of a foot, as we have shown in the
examples just given. But let this finish the treatment of the
ratio of rest-insertion.

Chapter 16

(30) Now let us say a few things about the mixing
of feet and the conjunction of their respective meters, since
many things were said when we were investigating what feet
ought to be mixed together, and since some things must be said
about the composition of meters when we begin to talk about
verse. For, feet are conjoined and mixed according to the
rules we disclosed in our second discourse. But here it is in
order to remember all the meters already celebrated by poets
have had each one its author and inventor to keep us from
transgressing certain fixed laws they laid down. For it is
not proper, when they have fixed them by reasoning, to make
any change in them, even if we could make the change ac-
cording to reasoning and without any offense to the ear.
ON MUSIC 291

And the knowledge of this sort of thing is handed down
not by art, but by history. And, therefore, it is believed rather
than known. For, if some Falerian or other has composed
meters to sound like these

Quando flagella ligas, ita liga,
Vitis et ulmus uti simul eant;*

we can't know it, but only believe it by hearing and reading.
It belongs to the discipline we are treating, to see whether
it consists of three dactyls and a final pyrrhic, as most of
those unskilled in music affirm (for they do not see a pyrrhic
cannot follow a dactyl), or, as reason shows, the first foot
in this meter is a choriamb, the second an ionic with a long
syllable resolved into two shorts, the last an iamb followed
by a three-time rest. And half-taught men could see this, if
it were recited and beaten out by a learned man according
to both laws. For they would judge from natural and com-
mon sense what the discipline's norm would prescribe.

(31) Yet the poet's wishing these numbers to be un-
changeable when we use this meter has to be respected. For
it satisfies the ear, although it would be equally well satisfied
if we should put a diiamb for the choriamb or the ionic,
without resolving the long syllable into shorts, and whatever
else might fit in. In this meter, then, nothing will be changed,
not for the reason by which we avoid inequality, but for that
by which we observe authority. For reason certainly teaches
some meters are established as immobile, that is, where noth-
ing should be changed, as in this one we have just talked
about; others as mobile, where one may substitute certain feet

4 ‘When you bind switches, bind so the elm and vine go together.’
Amerio points out this is the way Marius Victorinus and Terentianus
treat. this meter, of. cit. 184.
292 SAINT AUGUSTINE

for others, as in Trioae qui primus ab oris, arma virumque
cano. For here an anapest may be substituted for a spondee
in any place. Others are neither completely immobile nor
completely mobile, as

Pendeat ex humeris dulcis chelys
Et numeros edat varios, quibus
Assonet omne virens late nemus,
Et tortis errans qui flexibus.*

For you see here both spondees and dactyls can be placed
everywhere, except in the last foot which the author of the
meter always wished to be a dactyl. And you see, even in these
three kinds, authority has some weight.

(32) But as regards what in the composition of feet be-
longs to reason alone to judge concerning these things per-
ceived, you know those parts of feet harmoniously placed
with a rest after certain feet, as the iamb after the dichoree
or second epitrite, and the spondee after the antispast, are
still badly placed after other feet these have been mixed
with. For it is evident the iamb is well placed after the
molossus, as we see in this example with the final three-time
rest we are so often repeating. Ver blandum viret floribus.
But, if you should put a dichoree first in place of the molossus,
as in Vere terra viret floribus, the ear rejects and condemns it.
It is easy, too, to discover this in the other cases, if the ear
only search it out. For it is a most sure reasoning, when feet
are combined capable of such combination, only those parts
of a foot agreeing with all the feet in that sequence be added

5 Terentianus Maurus quotes this from Pomponius. See his de Metris
11.2135 ff. (Keil VI 389.
"Let the sweet harp hang from the shoulders and bring forth varied
numbers every far-green wood resounds with, and wandering with
curious turns . . .

ON MUSIC 293

on at the end, to avoid any discord arising one way or another
among friends.

(33) This is more wonderful that, although a spondee
completes both the diiamb and the dichoree without disson-
ance, yet when these two feet, either alone or in one way or
another mixed with others agreeable to them, have been put in
one sequence together, it is the sense’s judgment a spondee
cannot be put at the end. For no one would doubt, would he,
the ear accepts willingly each of these repeated separately; T'i-
menda res non est and Iam timere noli. But, if you should join
them so, T'imenda res, iam timere noli, I should not want to
hear it outside of prose. Nor is it less awkward if you put
another foot in anywhere, for instance, a molossus in this way,
Vir fortis, timenda res, iam timere noli, or in this way, Timen-
da res, vir fortis, iam timere noli, or again in this way, Ti-
menda res, iam timere noli, or again in this way, Timenda
res, iam timere vir fortis noli. And the cause of the awkward-
ness is this: the diiambic foot can also be beaten in the pro-
portion of two to one, just as the dichorce in the proportion
of one to two. But the spondee is equal to their two-part.
But, since one pulls it to the first part, the other to the last
part, a certain disagreement arises. And so in this way reason
relieves us of our wonder.

(34) And the antispast produces something just as mar-
velous. For if no other foot, or the diiamb alone of all of them,
should be mixed with it, it allows the meter to be closed by an
jamb, but not so when placed with others. In the case of the
dichoree, it is because of the dichoree itself; and I wonder
very little at that. But why with the other six-time feet it refuses
to allow that particular three-time foot at the end, I do not
know. The cause is perhaps too secret for us to be able to find
294 SAINT AUGUSTINE

it out and show it. But I judge it is so by these examples. For
there is no doubt each of these two meters, Potestate placet and
Potestate potentium placet, is repeated harmoniously with a
three-time rest at the end; but each of these with the same rest,
inharmoniously: Potestate praeclara placet, Potestate tibi mul-
tum placet, Potestate iam tibi sic placet, Potestate multum
tibi placet, Potestatis magnitudo placet. Now, in so far as the
senses are concerned, they have done their duty in this ques-
tion, and have indicated what they would approve and what
they would not. But reason must be consulted as to why it is
so. And mine in all this obscurity only sees this: the antispast
has its first half in common with the diiamb, for each begins
with a short and a long, but its last half in common with the
dichoree, for both end with a long and short. And so the antis-
past either when it is alone allows the iamb to close the meter
as its own first half, or again when it is with the diiamb it has
this half in common. And it would allow it with the dichoree,
if such an ending were harmonious with the dichoree, but not
in the case of others, and it is not joined with them in such
company.

Chapter 17

(35) But, with regard to the composition of meters, it
is enough at present to see diverse meters can be joined
together so long as they agree with respect to beat, that
is, to their arsis and thesis. But they differ either in quantity,
as when greater are joined with less, for example,

Iam satis terris nivis atque dirae
Grandinis misit Pater, et rubente
Dextera sacras iaculatus arces,
Terruit urbem.

For this fourth line made up of a choriamb and final long, you
ON MUSIC 295

see how small it is compared to the first three, all equal to each
other. Or in feet, as these,

Grato Pyrrha sub antro,
Cui flavam religas comam.*

You see, certainly, the first of the two consists of a spondee and
choriamb, and a final long due the spondee for completing the
six times; the second, of a spondee and choriamb, and two
final shorts likewise filling out the spondee to six times. They
are equal, then, in times, but somewhat different in feet.

(36) And there is another difference in combinations of
this kind: some are so combined they have no rests placed
between them as these last two; others require a rest of some
kind in between them, like these,

Vides ut alta stet nive candidum
Soracte, nec iam sustineant onus
Silvae laborantes, geluque
Flumina constiterint acuto."

For, if each of these is repeated, the first two acquire a one-
time rest, the third a two-time, the fourth, a three-time. Con-
sidered together, in going from the first to the second there is
necessarily a one-time pause, from the second to the third a
two-time, from the third to the fourth a three-time one. But,
if you should return from the fourth to the first, you will pause
for one time. And whatever ratio is used for the return to the
beginning is also used for passing to another such combination.
We rightly call this kind of combination a cycle [circuitum],
in Greek called períodos. So the cycle cannot be less than two
numbers, nor have they wished it to be more than four. It is

6 Horace, Odes 1.5.3-4.
7 Horace, Odes 1.9.1-4.
296 SAINT AUGUSTINE

proper, then, to call the least bi-membered, the middle one
tri-membered, the last quadri-membered; for the Greeks call
them díkolon, trikolon, tetrákolon. And, since we shall treat
of this whole class more thoroughly, as I have said, in our
discussion of verses, let this be enough for the moment.

(37) I think you now certainly understand there are a
great many kinds of meter. In fact, we found there were five
hundred and sixty-eight, when no examples were given of
rests except final ones, and no mixture of feet made, and no
resolution of long syllables into two shorts stretching the foot
to more than four syllables. But, if you wish to get the number
of meters with every possible insertion of rests applied, and
every combination of feet, and every resolution of long syll-
ables, the number is so great its name perhaps is not at hand.
But, although these examples we have given and those we can
give, poets judged proper in making them, and common nature
in hearing them, yet, unless a learned and practised man's
recitation should commend them to our ears and the sense of
hearing should not be slower than humanity requires, the ones
we have treated cannot be judged true. But let's rest a little,
and then let's discuss verse.

D. Good.
BOOK FIVE

Verse is discussed.

Chapter 1

(1) M. The controversy among ancient learned men
in their attempt to find out what verse is, has been great and
not without fruit. For the subject has been discovered and writ-
ten down for the knowledge of posterity, and has been con-
firmed, not only by serious and certain authority, but also by
reason. Now, they noticed there is a difference between rhythm
and meter, so all meter is rhythm, but not all rhythm meter.
For every legitimate composition of feet is numerable, since
the composition containing meter cannot not be number, that
is, not be rhythm. But, since it is not the same thing to roll
forward, although in legitimate feet, yet without any definite
end, and to progress likewise in legitimate feet, but to be
bounded by a fixed end, these kinds, therefore, had to be distin-
guished by names. So the first was called only by the name
proper to it, rhythm, but the other by meter as well as rhythm.
Again, since of those numbers bounded by a definite end, that
is of meters, there are some where there is no ratio of division
within them and others where there certainly is, this difference
also had to be noted in names. And so the kind of rhythm
where this ratio is not has been properly called meter; where
it is, they have named it verse. And reason will perhaps show
us the origin of this name as we go on. And do not think this
so prescribed it is not permissible also to call verses meters.
But it’s one thing to abuse a name with the license of a resem-
blance; another to call a thing by its name. Anyhow, let’s be

297
298 SAINT AUGUSTINE

done now with telling over names. For in their case, as we have
already learned, the willingness of those speaking and the
authority of age count for everything. Let’s investigate these
other things, if you will, as we are wont, with sense announcing
and reason discovering, so you may know the ancient authors
did not institute these things as if not already existing whole
and finished in the nature of things, but found them by reason-
ing and designated them by naming them.

Chapter 2

(2) And so I first ask you whether a foot only pleases
the ear if the two parts in it, one the arsis, the other the thesis,
answer to each other in a numerical and skillful joining?

D. I have already been persuaded and apprised of this.

M. Now, meter, resulting as it does from the conjunction of
feet, isn’t to be thought to belong to the class of things incap-
able of division, is it? For no indivisible thing can extend
through time, and it would be absurd, wouldn’t it, to think
what consists of divisible feet is indivisible?

D. I certainly say it isn’t indivisible.

M. But aren’t all things capable of division more beautiful
if their parts agree in some equality than if they should be
discordant and dissonant?

D. There’s no doubt about it.

M. Well, what number, then, is the author of equal divi-
sion? The number two?

D. It is.

M. Then, just as we found the foot is divided into two har-
monious parts and in this way delights the ear, if we also find
a meter of this kind, won’t it be rightly preferred to such as
are not?

D. I agree.
ON MUSIC 299

Chapter 3

(3) M. Very well. Now, tell me this. Since in all things
we measure by a part of time, one thing precedes and
another follows, one begins and another ends, would you think
there ought to be no difference between the part preceding or
beginning and the part which follows or ends?

D. I think there must be.

M. Tell me, then, what the difference is between the two
parts of a verse where one is cornua velatarum, and the other
vertimus antennarum.' For, if it should be recited, not as the
poet wrote it, with obvertimus, but in this way, Cornua vela-
larum vertimus antennarum, doesn't it become uncertain by
more or less frequent repetition which part is first, which last?
For it is no less the same verse said this way: Vertimus anten-
narum cornua velatarum.

D. I see it becomes very uncertain.

M. Do you think that ought to be avoided?

D. I do.

M. See, then, whether it has been properly avoided in this
case. One part of the verse, the first, is, Arma virumque cano,
and the other following it, Troiae qui primus ab oris. And they
differ from each other to the extent, if you change the order
and recite them this way, Troiae qui primus ab oris, arma
virumque cano, you would have to measure off other feet.

D. I understand.

M. But see whether this ratio is kept in the other lines. Now
whatever measure Arma virumque cano begins, you know
these do likewise: Italiam fato, Littora multum ille et, Vi su-
berum saevae, Multa quoque et bello, Inferretque deos, Al-
banique patres. In short, you can go through as many of the

1 Vergil, Aeneid 111.549.
300 SAINT AUGUSTINE

other lines as you wish, you will find these first verse-parts
to be of the same measure, that is, five distinct half-feet. Very
rarely, indeed, if not in this way; so the end-parts are no less
equal to each other: Troiae qui primus ab oris, Profugus La-
cinaque venit, Memorem Iunonis ob iram, Passus dum con-
deret urbem, Latio genus unde Latinum, Atque altae moenia
Romae.
D. That’s very evident.

(4) M. And so, five and seven half-feet divide into two
parts, the heroic verse consisting, as everyone knows, of six
four-time feet. And without the harmonious conjunction of
two members, either this one, or some other, there is no verse.
And in all these examples reason has shown this much must
be observed: the first part cannot be second, nor the second
first. And if it is otherwise, they will no longer be called verses
except through misuse of the name. But they will have rhythm
and meter, and it is not improper to stick in such things at long
intervals in long poems composed of verses. And just of such
a kind is the one I recited a while back: Cornua velatarum
vertimus antennarum. And so I don’t believe a verse is so
called, as some think, because it returns from a fixed ending
to the beginning of the same member, so the name is taken
from those who turn around [se vertunt] when retracing their
steps. For verse seems to have this in common with those meters
which are not verses. But, on the contrary, perhaps the name
came about rather in the way the grammarians have called
a deponent verb one not deposing the letter ‘r,’ for example
"lucror' and ‘conqueror’; just so whatever is made up of two
members, neither able to be put in the place of the other with-
out violating the law of the numbers, is called verse because it
cannot be reversed. But you can accept either of these deriva-
tions or reject them both, and look for another, or with me
ON MUSIC 301

disapprove of any question of this kind. It has nothing to do
with the present affair. For, since the thing itself signified by
this name is sufficiently apparent, there's no need to labor the
word’s derivation. Perhaps you have some objections?

D. I have none, certainly, but go on with the rest.

Chapter 4

(5) M. Next we must look to the ending of the verse.
For they wanted this also to be marked and distinguished
by some difference, or rather reason itself wanted it so. Don't
you think it better the ending confining the number's for-
ward roll, with the equality of times undisturbed, should stand
out, rather than be confused with the other parts not effecting
an ending?

D. Who doubts it? It's too evident.

M. See, then, whether those people were right in wanting
the spondaic foot to be the distinctive ending of the heroic
verse. For in the other five places it is permissible to put either
a spondee or a dactyl, but at the end only a spondee. For what
they reckon a trochee becomes a spondee on account of the last
syllable's indifference we spoke enough about in the treatment
of meter. But according to them the six-foot iambic either will
not be a verse or will be one without this distinction of ending.
But either is absurd. For no one, either among very learned
men or moderately or even slightly learned, has ever doubted
this was a verse: Phaselus ille quem videtis, hospites," and
whatever is formed of words in this number-form. And yet the
more serious authors, and so the most skillful, have judged
nothing to be a verse without a distinctive ending.

(6) D. You are right. And, therefore, I believe some other

2 Catullus, 4.1.
302 SAINT AUGUSTINE

mark of its ending must be looked for, and the spondee story
is not acceptable.

M. What is it? You don’t doubt, do you, whatever it is, it is
either a difference in foot, time, or both?

D. What else can it be?

M. But which of these three do you think it is? For I, since
ending a verse to keep it within its proper bounds is proper
only to the time-measure, I don’t think this mark can be taken
elsewhere than from time. Or do you find something else
better?

D. I certainly agree.

M. Do you see this, too. Since time in this case can only be
different in the one's being longer, the other shorter, the end-
mark must consist in a shorter time, because, when the verse
is ended, it is done to prevent it's proceeding farther?

D. I see that. But to what does the added ‘in this case’ refer?

M. To the fact we do not everywhere get the time-difference
only in brevity and length. You don't say, do you, the differ-
ence of summer and winter is one of time or rather of a shorter
and longer interval, and don't you place it in the power of cold
and hot, or of dry and wet, and any other thing like that?

D. I now understand, and I agree this mark we are looking
for must be taken from shortness of time.

(7) M. Listen then to this verse, Roma, Roma, cerne
quanta sit deum benignitas, called trochaic, and measure it
and say what you find out about its members and the number
of its feet.

D. I should easily reply about the feet, for it is evident there
are seven and a half, but as to the members the matter is not
clear enough. For I see the ends of parts of discourse in many
places, yet I believe the partition is in the eighth half-foot with
ON MUSIC 303

the first member Roma, Roma, cerne quanta, and the second
sit deum benignitas.

M. And how many half-feet does it have?

D. Seven.

M. Reason has most certainly led you to this. For since
nothing is better than equality, it would be proper to approach
it in any division. If only less can be gotten, an approximation
to it must be sought, not to stray too far from it. And so, since
here the verse has in all fifteen half-feet, it could not be divided
more equally than into eight and seven. But there is the same
approximation in seven and eight. Yet in this way the distinc-
tive ending would not be preserved, as reason itself has taught
us it must be. For if there were such a verse as Roma, cerne
quanta sit tibi deum benignitas, beginning with a member of
seven half-feet, Roma, cerne quanta sit, and ending with one
consisting of these eight, tibi deum benignitas, then the verse
could not close with a half-foot, for eight half-feet make four
whole feet. At the same time there would result another de-
formity in our not measuring the same feet in the last member
as in the first, and rather would the first member finish with
the mark of shorter time, that is, with a half-foot, than the sec-
ond this ending by rights belongs to. For in the one there are
three and a half trochees, Roma, cerne quanta sit; in the
other four iambs would be scanned tibi deum benignitas. But
in the case we have before us, we scan trochees in both mem-
bers, and the verse closes with a half-foot so the ending has
the mark of a short syllable. For there are four in the first,
Roma, Roma, cerne quanta, but three and a half in the sec-
ond, sit deum benignitas. Or are you prepared to say some-
thing to the contrary?

D. Nothing at all; I willingly agree.

(8) M. Let us keep these laws unchanged, then, if you
304 SAINT AUGUSTINE

will, that a verse should not be without a partition into two
members approaching equality, as this one is, Cornua vela-
tarum obvertimus antennarum. That this equality should not
make the members convertible, so to speak, as it does in Cor-
nua velatarum vertimus antennarum. And when this convert-
ibility is avoided, that the members should not have too great
a discrepancy between them, but nearly equal each other, as
much as possible by proximate numbers, not to say they can
be divided such a way, eight half-feet are in the first member,
Cornua velatarum vertimus, and four in the last, that is,
antennarum. That the second member should not have an
even number of half-feet, as tibi deum benignitas, lest the
verse, finishing with a full foot, should not have an ending
distinguished by a shorter time.

D. I now have them, and I shall commit them to memory
as far as I can.

Chapter 5

(9) M. Since, then, we now hold a verse ought not to
end with a full foot, how do you think we ought to measure
the heroic verse so as to preserve the law of members and the
end-marks?

D. Well, I sec there are twelve half-feet, and the members
cannot each have six half-feet, because convertibility must be
avoided. Nor is it proper for there to be a great discrepancy
between them as in three and nine or nine and three. Nor
should an even number of half-feet be given the second mem-
ber, resulting in a division of eight and four or four and eight,
and a verse ending with a full foot. The division must be made
into five and seven or seven and five. For these numbers are
both odd and proximate, and the members certainly approach
each other more nearly than they would in the numbers four
and eight. To be very certain about it, I see the end-parts of
ON MUSIC 305

discourse always or nearly always in the fifth half-foot, as in
Vergil’s first verse, Arma virumque cano; and in the second,
Italiam fato; and in the third, Littora multum ille et; likewise
in the fourth, Vi superum saevae; and so on, for nearly the
whole poem.

M. That's true. But you must look to what feet you are
measuring; to dare no violation of these laws just so firmly
established.

D. Although the reason is sufficiently clear to me, yet I am
disturbed by the novelty. For, usually, in this kind of line we
scan nothing but spondees and dactyls, and almost no one is
so uneducated as not to have heard of that, even if he is less
able to do it. And so, if we should in this case wish to follow
that very common custom, the law of ending has to be
abrogated, for the first member would close with a half-foot,
but the second with a full foot, and it ought to have been just
the contrary. But, since it seems very unsuitable to abolish this
law and I have now learned to know it is permissible, in num-
bers, for us to begin with an incomplete foot, we are left to
judge it is not a dactyl with a spondee here, but an anapest.
So the verse begins with one long syllable; then two feet, either
spondees or anapests or both, end the first member; then again
three feet for the other member, either anapests or spondees in
any place or in all; and finally one syllable to rightly end the
verse. Do you accept this?

(10) MM. I, too, judge it quite correct, but the public is not
easily persuaded of such things. For the force of custom, if it is
old and born of false opinion, is so great nothing is more hostile
to the truth. For you understand, as far as making the verse
goes, there is no difference whether in this kind of line the
anapest or the dactyl is placed with the spondee. Yet, for
measuring it rationally, something not proper to the ear but
306 SAINT AUGUSTINE

to the mind, this fact is discerned by a true and fixed reason,
not by irrational opinion. And we are not the first to have
found it out, but it was noticed long before this custom grew
up. And so, if people should read those who have been most
learned in this discipline either in the Greek or Latin tongue,
they, chancing to hear this, will not be too surprised, although
one is ashamed of the stupidity of seeking an authority for
strengthening men’s reason, since nothing is to be preferred
to the authority of truth and reason itself, certainly better than
any man. For we do not in this case look only to the authority
of the ancients as in the lengthening or shortening of a syllable,
to use our words as they also used them. Yet, because in a
matter of this kind it is the part of slothfulness to follow no
tule, and of license to establish a new one, so in the measuring
of verse the inveterate will of man and not the eternal ratio
of things is to be considered, since we first perceive its measured
length naturally by the ear, and then establish it by the rational
consideration of numbers, and since anyone judging this meter
to be properly completed more surely than other meters judges
it must close with a distinctive ending, and since it is clear
such an ending must be marked by a shorter time. For this
confines the length of the time and somehow checks it.

Chapter 6

(11) And since all this is so, how can the second mem-
ber end if not with an incomplete foot? But the beginning
of the first member is either a complete foot, as in the trochaic
verse, Roma, Roma, cerne quanta sit deum benignitas, or part
of a foot, as in the heroic verse, Arma virumque cano, Troiae
qui primus ab oris. And so, with all hesitation now removed,
measure if you will the verse, Phaselus ille quem videtis, hos-
pites, and tell me about its members and feet.
ON MUSIC 307

D. I see its members are certainly distributed into five and
seven half-feet, so the first is Phaselus ille and the second quem
videtis hospites. The feet, I see, are iambic.

M. But I ask, aren't you to take care at all the verse doesn’t
end with a full foot?

D. You are right; I was off the track. For who wouldn’t be
bright enough to see it must end in a half-foot like the heroic
verse. And considered in this genus, we measured the verse,
not with iambs, but with trochees, to have a half-foot close it.

(12) M. It’s just as you say. But look, what do you think
is to be said about this one they call Asclepiadean, Maecenas
atavis edite regibus.) For a part of the discourse ends in the
sixth syllable, and not inconsistently, but in nearly all verses
of this kind. Its first member is Maecenas atavis; the second,
edite regibus. And one can well hesitate as to what ratio it's
in. For if you should measure it off in four-time feet, there
will be five half-feet in the first member and four in the second.
But the law forbids the last member's consisting of an even
number of half-feet so ending the verse in a full foot. It re-
mains for us to consider six-time feet, with each member con-
sisting of three half-feet. And in order for the first member to
end with a full foot, we must begin with two longs; then a
whole choriamb divides the verse so the second member begins
with another choriamb following it, and the verse closes with
a half-foot of two short syllables. For this number of times
together with the spondee placed at the beginning fill out a
six-time foot. Do you have anything perhaps to add to this?

D. Nothing, certainly.

M. You are willing for both members to consist of the same
number of half-feet.

D. Why not? For conversion here is not to be feared, because

3 Horace, Odes 1.1.1.
308 SAINT AUGUSTINE

if the first member were put in place of the second with the
first becoming second, the same law of feet will no longer hold.
And so there is no cause why the same number of half-feet
should not be allowed the members in this case, since this
equality can be maintained without any fault of convertibility,
and since also the law of a distinctive ending is preserved when
the foot doesn’t end in a full foot—and this ought to be most
consistently preserved.

Chapter 7

(13) M. You have quite seen through the matter. And
so, since now reason has found there are two kinds of
verses, one where the number of half-feet in the members is
the same, another where it is not, let us diligently consider,
if you will, how this inequality of half-feet may be referred to
some equality by a somewhat more obscure but certainly very
subtle ratio of numbers. For look, when I say two and three,
how many numbers do I say?

D. Two, of course.

M. So two is one number, and three one, and any other you
might have said.

D. That's so.

M. Doesn't it seem to you from this, one can be joined not
absurdly with any number? For one can't say one is two, but
in a certain way two is one; likewise it can be truly said three
and four are one.

D. I agree.

M. Listen to this. Tell me what does three times two make
all together?

D. Six.

M. Six and three aren't the same number, are they?

D. Not at all.
ON MUSIC 309

M. Now, I want you to take four times three and tell me
the product.

D. Twelve.

M. You see, also, twelve is more than four.

D. And a great deal more certainly.

M. To dilly-dally no longer, this rule must be fixed: what-
ever two numbers you choose from two on, the less multiplied
by the greater must exceed the greater.

D. Who could have any doubt about this? For, what is so
small in the plural number as two? And yet, if multiplied by a
thousand, it will so exceed a thousand as to be its double.

M. You are right. But take the number one and then any
other greater number and, just as we did with the others,
multiply the lesser by the greater. The greater will not be ex-
ceeded in the same way, will it?

D. Clearly not, but the lesser will be equal to the greater.
For two times one is two, ten times one is ten, and a thousand
times one is a thousand, and by whatever number I multiply
one, the result must be equal.

M. So one has a certain right of equality with other num-
bers, not only in any number’s being one, but also in one’s
giving, multiplied by any number, that same number as a
product.

D. That’s very evident.

(14) M. Come now, look to the numbers of half-feet the
unequal memebrs in the verse are made of, and you will find a
wonderful equality by means of the ratio we have discussed.
For, I believe, that is the least verse in two members of an
unequal number of half-feet which has four half-feet and
three, as for instance Hospes ille quem vides. For the first
member, Hospes ille, can be cut equally into two parts of two
half-feet each, but the second, quem vides, is so divided one
310 SAINT AUGUSTINE

part has two half-feet, the other one half-foot. And so this last
member is as if it were two and two by that law, just discussed,
of the equality one has with all numbers. And so by this divi-
sion the first member is in some way the same length as the
second. And where there would be four and five half-feet, as
in the case of Roma, Roma, cerne quanta sit, it doesn’t work
out this way, and so that will be a meter rather than a verse,
because the members are unequal in such a way they can be
referred to no law of equality by any division whatsoever. You
certainly see, I believe, the four half-feet, Roma, Roma, of the
first member can be separated into two each; and the five last
ones, cerne quanta sit, can be divided into two and three,
where, by no law whatsoever, does equality appear. For in no
way can the five half-feet, because of the two and three, be
accounted the same as the four, the way we found in the
shorter verse just given, the three half-feet because of the one
and two have the same value as four. Is there anything you
haven’t followed or anything displeasing you?

D. Why, on the contrary, everything is evident and thought
out.

(15) M. Well, now, let's consider five and three half-feet,
like this little verse, Phaselus ille quem vides, and let’s see how
such an inequality may fall under a law of equality. For all
agree this kind of line is not only a meter, but also a verse.
And so, when you have cut the first member into two and
three half-feet, and the second into two and one, join to-
gether the subordinate parts you find alike in both, since
in the first section we have two’s, and in the second there
are two parts left, one of three half-feet from the first member,
the other in one half-foot from the last member. And so we
also join the last two together because it is in community
with all members, and, added together, one and three make
ON MUSIC 311

four, the same as two and two. By this division, therefore,
five and three half-feet are brought into agreement, too. But
tell me if you have understood.

D. I certainly have, and very much approve.

Chapter 8

(16) M. We should next discuss five and seven half-
feet. Of this kind are those two noblest verses, the heroic
and what is popularly called the iambic, a six-foot verse, too.
For Arma virumque cano, Troiae qui primus ab oris is so di-
vided its first member is Arma virumque cano, or five half-feet,
and its second Troiae qui primus ab oris, or seven. And Phase-
lus ille quem videtis, hospites has for its first member Phaselus
ille, in five half-feet, and for its second, in seven half-feet,
quem videtis, hospites. But this great nobleness labors within
this law of equality. For when we have divided the first five
half-feet into two and three, and the last seven into three
and four, the parts of three half-feet each will certainly go
together. And if the other two should combine so one of them
consisted in one half-foot and the other in five, they would
be joined together by the law permitting the union of one
with any number, and added together they would make
six, the sum also of three and three. But now, because two
and four are found in this case, together they will give six,
but by no law of equality is two as much as four, to produce,
you might say, a necessary joining. Unless you could say,
perhaps, it is sufficiently subsumed under a rule of equality
by having two and four make six just as three and three.
And I don't think this ratio is to be attacked, for this is an
equality, too. But I should not be willing for five and three
half-feet to enjoy a greater harmony than five and seven. For
the name of one is not so famous as that of the other, and in
312 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the case of the first you see not only the same sum is found
when one and three are added together as when two and two,
but also the parts are much more concordant when one and
three are joined together because of the harmony of one with
all numbers, than when two and four are joined as in the
second case. Do you find anything not clear?

D. Nothing at all. But somehow it offends me these six-
foot verses, although more celebrated than other kinds and
said to have the first place among verses, should have less
harmony in their members than those of obscurer fame.

M. Don’t be discouraged. For I shall show you so great
a harmony in the six-foot verses as they alone among all
others have merited, so you may see they have been justly
preferred. But, since its treatment is a little longer, although
more interesting, we ought to leave it to the end when we
have sufficiently discussed the others and are free of all care
for a closer scrutiny of the secrets of these verses.

D. Willingly. But I should wish to have explained what
we first started out to do so as to understand it now more
easily.

M. In comparison with those already discussed, those you
are waiting for become more agreeable.

Chapter 9

(17) And so now consider whether in two members,
one six half-feet and the other seven, is found the equality
necessary to a real verse. For you see this must be discussed
after five and seven half-feet. And an example of this is
Roma, cerne quanta sit deum benignitas.

D. I see the first member can be distributed into parts
having three half-feet each; the second into three and four.
And so when the equals are added they make six half-feet, but
ON MUSIC 313

three and four are seven and are not equal in number to the
first lot. But if we should consider two and two in the part
with four, and two and one in the part with three, then, when
the parts with two have been added, the sum is four, but when
those with two and one are added, if we take these also as four
because of one’s agreeing with all other numbers, then they
become all together eight, and they exceed the sum of six by
more than when they were seven.

(18) M. It's as you say. Now, seeing this kind ot combina-
tion doesn't fall under the law of verses, let's consider now
next in order those members with the first having eight half-
feet, the second seven. Well. this combination has what we
want. For, joining the half part of the first member with
the part of the second member nearest that half, since they
are each four half-feet, I make a sum of eight. And so there
are left four half-feet from the first member and three from
the second. wo from the one and two from the other to-
gether become four. Again two from the one and one from
the other, combined according to that law of agreement con-
stituting one equal to all the other numbers, are in a way
taken for four. So now this eight agrees with the other eight.

D. But why don't I get an example of this?

M. Because it's been so often repeated. Yet, so you may
not think it's been left out at its proper place, here it is,
Roma, Roma, cerne quanta sit deum benignitas, or this, too,
Optimus beatus ille qui procul negotio.*

(19) And so now examine the combination of nine and
seven half-feet. An example of this is Vir optimus beatus ille
qui procul negotio.

D. It is easy to recognize these harmonies. For the first

4 A variation on Horace, Epodes 1.2.
314 SAINT AUGUSTINE

member is divided into four and five half-feet and the second
into three and four. The lesser part of the first member, then,
joined with the greater part of the second, makes eight, and
the greater part of the first member with the lesser part of
the second likewise makes eight. For the first combination is
four and four half-feet, and the second five and three. Fur-
ther, if you should divide five into two and three half-feet, and
three into two and one, there appears another harmony of
two with two and of one with three, because one is joined
with all other numbers by that law of ours. But, unless reason
fails me, there remains nothing more for us to seek on the
combination of members. For we have already come to eight
feet, and we recognized some time ago a verse can’t lawfully
exceed eight feet. And so, come now, open up these secrets
of the six-foot verses, the heroic and iambic or trochaic, you
have excited and disturbed my attention for.

Chapter 10

(20) M. I shall; at least, that reason common to us
both will. But say, don’t you remember when we were talk-
ing about meters, we said and wholly exhibited by our very
senses, those feet whose parts are in the superparticular ratio,
either in two and three, as the cretic or paeons, or in three
and four, as the epitrites, are thrown out by the poets because
of their less pleasing sound and harmoniously embellish the
severity of prose when a period's close is bound by them?

D. I remember. But where does this get us?

M. It’s because I want us first to understand, once feet of
this kind have been denied use in poetry, there only remain
those whose parts are in a one-to-one ratio as the spondee,
or two-to-one as the iamb, or in both as the choriamb.

D. That's so.
ON MUSIC 315

M. But if this is the matter of the poets and prose is at
variance with verse, no verse can be made except of this
kind of feet.

D. I agree, for I see poems in verse are on a grander scale
than those other meters proper to lyric poems. But so far,
where this reasoning leads us I can’t see.

(21) M. Be patient. Now let's talk about the excellence
of six-foot verse. And first I want to show you, if I can, the
most proper six-foot verses can only be of two kinds, also the
most famous of all: one the heroic like Arma virumque cano,
Troiae qui primus ab oris, measured according to custom with
the spondee and dactyl, but according to a more subtle
reasoning with spondee and anapest; the other called iambic,
and by the same reasoning found to be trochaic. Now, I be-
lieve you see clearly somehow the sound-intervals are dull,
unless the long syllables are interspersed with short ones;
likewise they become too cut up and too tremulous, you
might say, unless the shorts are interspersed with longs; and
in neither case is there a proper compounding even though
they burden the ear with an equality of times. And so, neither
those verses with six pyrrhics nor those with six proceleus-
matics aspire to the dignity of heroic verse, nor those with
six tribrachs to the dignity of trochaic verse. Further, in those
verses reason itself prefers to all others, if you should convert
the members, the whole will be so changed we will be forced
to measure off other feet. And so you might say these are more
inconvertible than those consisting either all of shorts or all
of longs. And, therefore, it makes no difference whether the
members in these more properly organized verses are ordered
with five and seven half-feet or with seven and five. For in
neither of these orders can the verse be converted without so
much change it turns out to run in other feet. Yet, in the
316 SAINT AUGUSTINE

case of these verses, if the poem is begun with verses having
the first members of five half-feet, those with first members
of seven half-feet should not be mixed in, lest it then be pos-
sible to convert them all. For no substitution of feet cancels
conversion. Yet the rare interspersion in heroic verses of an
all spondaic verse is allowed, although this latter age of ours
has very little approved it. But in the case of trochaic or
iambic verses, although it is permissible to put in a tribrach
anywhere, yet it has been judged very bad in poems of this
sort to resolve a verse entirely into shorts.

(22) And so when the epitrites have been excluded from
the six-foot mode of verse, not only because they are more
fitted to prose, but also because with six of them, like the di-
spondee, they would exceed thirty-two times, and when the
five-time feet have also been excluded because prose claims
them more eagerly for closing periods, and when likewise the
molossi and all other six-time feet, although they do well in
poems, have been excluded from this present affair because
of the number of times, there remain the verses composed
all of short syllables having either pyrrhics or proceleusmatics
or tribrachs, and all of longs having spondees. And though
they are admitted to the six-foot mode, yet they must give
way to the dignity and harmony of those varied with shorts
and longs and on this account much less convertible.

Chapter 11

(23) But it can be asked why the six-foot verses are
judged better measured by that subtle ratio in terms of
anapests or trochees, than when they are measured in terms
of dactyls or iambs. For without reference to meaning, since
we are now discussing numbers, if the verse were in the one
case Troiae qui primus ab oris arma virumque cano, or in the
ON MUSIC 317

other Qui procul malo pius beatus ille, each of these would
certainly be a six-foot verse, and not less tempered with a
good disposition of longs and shorts, nor any more convertible.
And the members in each case are so ordered a part of dis-
course ends in the fifth and seventh half-feet. Why, then,
should they be thought better if they are rather so: Arma
virumque cano, Troiae qui primus ab oris and Beatus ille
qui procul pius malo? And to this question I could too
easily and rapidly reply, it happened by chance these were
first noticed and repeated. Or if not fortuitous, I believe it
seemed better the heroic verse should close with two longs
rather than with two shorts and a long, because the ear finds
its rest more easily in the longs. And the other verse would
better have a long syllable than a short in the final half-foot.
Or perhaps it’s this way. Whichever of the two pairs are
chosen first necessarily rob of their supremacy those they
could become by a conversion of members. And so that kind
is judged best Arma virumque cano, Troiae qui primus ab oris
is an example of, and immediately the other, its converse,
would be improper, for instance, Troiae qui primus ab oris,
arma virumque cano. And this must also hold for the trochaic
kind. For if Beatus ille qui procul negotio is better, then the
kind it would become on conversion, Qui procul negotio beatus
ille, certainly should not be. Yet, if anyone should dare make
such verses, it is evident he will make other kinds of six-foot
verse not so good as these.

(24) And so these, the most beautiful of all six-foot
verses, have not been able, the two of them, to maintain their
integrity against the license of men. For in the case of the
trochaic kind, the poets think all four-time feet applying to
numbers should be mixed in, not only with the six-foot verse,
but with the least up to the greatest magnitude of eight feet.
318 SAINT AUGUSTINE

And the Greeks, in fact, put them alternately, beginning with
the first and third places, if the verse began with a half-foot;
if with a full trochee, these longer feet are put alternately
beginning with the second and fourth places. And in order
for this corruption to be tolerable, they haven’t divided each
foot into two parts by beat, one to the arsis, the other to the
thesis, but, putting the arsis on one foot and the thesis on the
next (and so they call the six-foot verse trimeter), they bring
the beat back to the division of the epitrites. At all events,
if this should be constantly held to, although the epitrites are
feet belonging to prose rather than to poetry and it would
turn out to be, no longer six-foot, but three-foot verse, yet
in any case that equality of numbers would not be wholly
destroyed. But now it is allowed, provided only they are also
put in the places already mentioned, to put the four-time
feet not only in every place, but wherever one pleases and
as many times as one pleases. And even the ancients of our
race could not keep these places at intervals free of feet of
this kind. And so with respect to this kind of verse the poets
have gone all the way in this corruption and license, because,
we are to think, they wished dramatic poetry to be very much
like prose. But now that enough has been said as to why
these among six-foot verses are of greater nobleness, let's see
why the six-foot verses themselves are better than any others
constructed of any number of feet whatsoever. Perhaps you
have something to say against this?

D. No, I agree. And now I am eagerly waiting to know
about that equality of members you so much interested me in
a while ago—if it is now proper to turn to it.

5 The curious argument on the six-foot verse which follows is referred
to very definitely by Aulus Gellius, XVIILI5.2, who refers it back to
Varro. See Weil, op.cit. 142.
ON MUSIC 319

Chapter 12

(25) M. Then let me have your entire attention and
tell me if you think any length can be cut into any number
of parts.

D. I have been sufficiently persuaded of that, and I don't
think I can doubt every length called a line has its half and
in this way can be cut into two lines. And, since the lines
made by this cut are certainly lines, it is clear the same thing
can be done with them. And so, any length can be cut into
any number of parts.

M. Very readily and truly explained. And can't it be rightly
affirmed every length, on being extended its length in width,
is equal to the square of its width? For, if the line move side-
ways any more or less than the length of the line itself, it
isn't the square; if just that, it is the square.

D. I understand and agree. Nothing could be truer.

M. I am sure you see this follows: if counters, laid out one
after another at equal distances, are substituted for the line,
their length will only take on the form of a square when the
stones have been multiplied by an equal number. For ex-
ample, if you put down two stones, you will not get a square
unless two others are added in width. And if three, six must
be added, apportioned in width in two rows of three each.
For, if they should be added in length, no figure results. For
length without width is not a figure. And it is possible to con-
sider the other numbers in proportion. For, as two times two
and three times three make square figures in numbers, so also
do four times four, five times five, six times six, and so on for
the rest.

D. This, too, is reasoned and evident.

M. See, now, if time has length.
320 SAINT AUGUSTINE

D. Who would doubt there’s no time without length?

M. And further, can a verse be without time-length?

D. It certainly cannot.

M. What in this length is to be substituted for the counters:
the feet necessarily divided into two parts, that is, into an
arsis and thesis, or the half-feet, each containing only an arsis
or thesis?

D. I judge it more proper to substitute the half-feet for
the counters.

(26) M. Come, then, repeat how many halí-feet the
heroic verse's shorter member contains.

D. Five.

M. Give an example.

D. Arma virumque cano.

M. You only wanted the other seven feet to be in harmony
by an equality with these five didn't you?

D. "That's all, certainly.

M. Further, is there any verse seven half-feet can complete
by themselves?

D. There certainly is. For the first and smallest verse has
just this number of half-feet with a rest added at the end.

M. You are right. But for it to be a verse, into what two
members is it divided?

D. Into four and three half-feet.

M. Then bring each part under the law of squares, and see
what four times four makes.

D. Sixteen.

M. What three times three?

D. Nine.

M. What's the whole?

D. Twenty-five.

MM. Since, then, seven half-feet can have two members,
ON MUSIC 321

when each of its members has been referred to the ratio of
squares they add up to the number twenty-five. And this is
one part of the heroic verse.

D. So it is.

M. Then the other part of five half-feet, since it cannot be
divided into two members and must harmonize by means of
some equality, isn’t the whole of it to be squared?

D. I judge so. And yet I already see a marvelous equality.
For five times five gives twenty-five. And so, not without
cause have the six-foot verses become more famous and more
noble than the others. For it is hard to say how great the
difference is between the equality of these unequal members
and that of all others.

Chapter 13

(27) M. Then my promise didn’t fail you, or, rather,
reason itself both of us follow. And so, to finish this talk
soon enough, you see certainly, although the meters are al-
most innumerable, yet a meter can only be a verse if it has
two members harmoniously joined together, either with an
equal number of half-feet with their endings inconvertible,
as in Maecenas atavis edite regibus, or again with an unequal
number of half-feet yet combined according to some equality
as four and three, or five and three, or five and seven, or
six and seven, or eight and seven, or seven and nine. For the
trochaic can begin with a full foot, as in Optimus beatus ille
qui procul negotio, and with an incomplete foot, as in Vir
optimus beatus ille qui procul negotio, but it can certainly
only end with an incomplete foot. Whether these incomplete
feet contain whole half-feet, as in the case of the example
just cited, or less than a half-foot, as the two last shorts in
this choriamb, Maecenas atavis edite regibus, or more than
322 SAINT AUGUSTINE

a half, as the first two longs at the beginning or the bacchius
at another choriambic verse’s end, as for example, Te domus
Evandri, te sedes celsa. Latini, still all these incomplete feet
are called half-feet.

(28) Now, not only are there such poems as those of the
epic or even of the comic poets, made in verses so as to be
of one kind, but also the lyric poets composed the circular
kind called by the Greek periodoi, not only on those meters
not governed by the law of verse, but also in verses. For that
famous one of Flaccus,

Nox erat, caelo fulgebat luna sereno
Inter minora sidera."

is a circular two-membered poem consisting of verses. And
the two verses cannot harmonize unless they are both reckoned
in six-time feet. For the heroic mode does not harmonize
with the iambic or trochaic mode, because one set of feet is
divided in a one-one ratio, the other in a double ratio. And
so, the circular poems are made either of any meter without
verse, like those in the discussion before this one when we
were talking just about meters, or are made only of verses
like those we have just been talking about, or are measured
both in verses and other meters, as in this case:

Diffugere nives, redeunt iam gramina campis,
Arboribusque comae."

But in what order you place either the verses with the other
meters, or the greater members with the lesser, makes no
difference in the ear's pleasure, provided the circular meter

: according to Maurist ed.
7 Horace. Epodes
8 Horace, Odes IV 7
ON MUSIC 323

is not shorter than a two-membered verse nor longer than a
four-membered one. But, if you have nothing to the contrary,
let this be the end of the discussion, so we may next come
with as much wisdom as we can from these sensible traces of
music, all dealing with that part of it in the numbers of the
times to the real places where it is free of all body.
BOOK SIX

The mind is raised from the consideration of changeable
numbers in inferior things to unchangeable numbers in un-
changeable truth itself.

Chapter 1

(1) M. We have delayed long enough and very child-
ishly, too, through five books, in those number-traces belong-
ing to time-intervals. And let's hope a dutiful labor will
readily excuse our triviality in the eyes of benevolent men.
For we only thought it ought to be undertaken so adolescents,
or men of any age God has endowed with a good natural
capacity, might with reason guiding be torn away, not quickly
but gradually, from the fleshly senses and letters it is difficult
for them not to stick to, and adhere with the love of unchange-
able truth to one God and Master of all things who with no
mean term whatsoever directs human minds. And so, who-
ever reads those first books will find us dwelling with gram-
matical and poetical minds, not through choice of permanent
company, but through necessity of wayfaring. But when he
comes to this book, if, as I hope and pray, one God and Lord
has governed my purpose and will and led it to what it was
intent upon, he will understand this trifling way is not of
trifling value, this way we, too, not very strong ourselves,
have preferred to walk, in company with lighter persons,
rather than to rush with weaker wings through the freer air.
So, as far as I can see, he will judge either we haven't sinned
at all or very little, if only he is of the number of spiritual
men. For if by chance the other crowd from the schools,
with tumultous tongues taking vulgar delight in the noise

324
ON MUSIC 325

of rhythm-dancers, should chance upon these writings, they
will either despise all or consider those first five books suffi-
cient. But this one the very fruit of those is found in, they
will either throw aside as not necessary, or put off as over
and above the necessary. But, brother-fashion, I warn those
others not educated to understand these things, if, steeped in
the sacraments of Christian purity and glowing with the
highest charity for the one and true God, they have passed
over all these childish things, for fear they descend to them and,
having begun to labor here, bewail their backwardness, not
knowing they can pass over difficult roads and obstacles in
their path, even if unknown, by flying. But, if those read
who because of infirm or untrained steps cannot walk here,
having no wings of piety to disregard and fly by these things
with, let them not mix themselves up with an improper busi-
ness, but nourish their wings with the precepts of the most
salutary religion and in the nest of the Christian faith, and
carried over by these let them leave behind the labor and dust
of this road, more intent on the fatherland itself than on these
tortuous paths. For these books are written for those who,
given up to secular letters, are involved in great errors and
waste their natural good qualities in vanities, not knowing
what their charm is. And if they would notice it, they would
see how to escape those snares, and what is the place of hap-
piest freedom.’
Chapter 2

(2) And so you, my friend, sharing reason with me,

1 Because of the passages of Letters 101 to Memorius, Marrow conjectures
that this first chapter of Book 6 is really an introduction tacked on
in order to make Book 6 a self-sufficient unit. For this was the only
Book he sent to Memorius, Sextum sane librum quem emendatum
reperi, ubi est omnis fructus caeterorum, non distuli mittere Charitati
tuae (Epist. 101.4). See Marrou. St. Augustin et la fin de la culture
antique (Bibl. des Ecoles d'Athénes et de Rome, cvix, 1939) 580-83.
326 SAINT AUGUSTINE

that we may pass from corporeal to incorporeal things, tell me
if you will, when we recite this verse, Deus creator omnium,
where you think the four iambs and twelve times are it con-
sists of. Is it to be said these numbers are only in the sound
heard or also in the hearer’s sense belonging to the ears, or
also in the act of the reciter, or, because the verse is known,
in our memory too?

D. In all of them, I think.

M. Nowhere else?

D. I don’t see what else there is, unless, perhaps, there is
some interior and superior power these proceed from.

M. I am not asking for what is to be merely suspected. And
so if these four kinds are so apparent to you, you see no others
equally evident, then let us look at them, if you will, separately
one by one and see whether any one of them can be without
any other. For I am sure you won’t deny the possibility of a
sound’s beating the air by the drop of liquid or the shock of
bodies, with pauses and limits of this sort, and existing where
no hearer is present. And when this takes place, of the four
there is only this first kind where the sound has the numbers.

D. I don't see any other.

(3) M. What about this other kind in the sense of the
hearer? Can it be if nothing sounds? For I am not asking
whether the ears have, if something sounds, a power [vis] of
perceiving they don't lack even if the sound is wanting. For,
even when there is a silence, they differ somewhat from deaf
ears. But I am asking whether they have the numbers them-
selves, even if nothing is sounding. For it is one thing to have
the number, another to be able to sense the harmonious
sound. For if you should touch with your fingers a sentient
place in the body, the number of times it's touched is sensed
by the sense of touch. And when it is sensed, the sensor pos-
ON MUSIC 327

sesses it. But it is likewise a question whether, not the sensing,
but the number is in the sensor, when nothing is touching.
D. I couldn't easily say the sense is lacking in such numbers
determined in themselves, even before anything sounds; other-
wise it would neither be charmed by their harmony nor of-
fended by their absurdity. And so, whatever it is we either
approve or disapprove by when something sounds, when we
do so not by reason but by nature, that I call the number of
the sense. For this power of approval and disapproval is not
created in my ears, when I hear the sound. The ears are cer-
tainly not otherwise accessible to good sounds than to bad ones.
M. Watch out you don't confuse the following two things.
For, if any verse is sometimes pronounced shorter, sometimes
longer, it cannot occupy the same interval of time, although
the same ratio of feet may be preserved. And so, pleasing the
ears by its peculiar kind of harmony is the doing of that power
we accept harmonious things and reject disagreeable ones by.
But its being perceived in a shorter time when it is spoken
more quickly than when it is spoken more slowly makes no
difference except how long the ears are touched by sound. So
this affection of the ears when they are touched with sound is
in no way such as if they should not be so touched. For as hear-
ing differs from not hearing, so hearing this tone differs from
hearing another. Therefore, this affection is neither prolonged
beyond nor restrained to less, since it is the measure of the
sound producing it. So it is one thing in the iamb, another in
the tribrach, longer in the longer iamb, shorter in the shorter,
nothing in a rest. And if it is produced by an harmonious
sound, it must be harmonious. Nor can it be except when its
author, the sound, is present; for it is like a trace imprinted
in water, not found before your pressing a body into it, and
not remaining when you have taken it away. But that natural
power, belonging to the judiciary, you might say, present in
328 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the ears, is still there during the rest, and the sound does not
bring it into us, but is rather received by it to be approved of
or disapproved of. And so, if I am not mistaken, these two
must be distinguished, and it must be admitted the numbers in
the passion of the ears when something is heard are brought in
by the sound and taken away by the rest. And it is inferred
the numbers in the sound itself can be without those in the
hearing, although these last cannot be without the first.

Chapter 3

(4) D.Tagree.

M. Notice, then, this third kind, being in the practice and
operation’ of the person pronouncing, and see whether these
numbers can be without those in the memory. For silent within
ourselves we can also by thinking go through certain numbers
in the amount of time they would be gone through by the
voice. It is evident these are in a certain operation of the
mind which, since it produces no sound and visits no passion
on the ear, shows this kind of number can be without the other
two, namely, the one in the sound, the other in the hearer
when he hears. But we ask if it would be without memory’s
accompanying it. Yet, if the soul produces the numbers we
find in the beat of the veins, the question is solved. For it is
clear they are in the operation and we are no whit helped
with them by the memory. And if it is not sure in the case of
these whether they belong to the soul operating, certainly
about those we produce in recurrent breathing, there is no
doubt there are numbers in its time-intervals, and the soul so
operates them they can also be changed in many ways when
the will is applied. Nor is there need of any memory for their
production.

D. It seems to me this kind of number can be without the
ON MUSIC 329

other three. For, although I don’t doubt the various vein-
beats and respiration-intervals are created for the equilibrium
[temperatio] of bodies, yet who would so much as deny they
are created by the soul in operation? And if the flow, accord-
ing to the diversity of bodies, is faster for some, slower for
others, yet, unless there is a soul to produce it, there is none.

M. Consider, too, the fourth class, that is, the class of those
numbers in the memory. For, if we draw them out by recol-
lection, and, when we are carried away to other thoughts, we
again leave them as if hidden in their own hiding places, I
don’t think it is difficult to see they can be without the others.

D. I don’t doubt they can be without the others. But just
the same, unless they were heard or thought, they could not
be sent on to the memory. And so, although they remain at
the death of those that are heard or thought, yet they are
imprinted by them.

Chapter 4

(5) M. I don't contradict you, and I should like now
to ask which of these four kinds you judge the principal
one. Except, I believe, while we were discussing these things,
a fifth kind appeared from somewhere, a kind in the natural
judgment of perceiving when we are delighted by the equality
of numbers or offended at a flaw in them. For I am mindful of
your opinion our sense could have in no way done this with-
out certain numbers latent in it. Or do you, perhaps, think a
great power like this belongs to some one of those four?

D. On the contrary. I think this kind is to be distinguished
from all of them. For it is one thing to sound and this is at-
tributed to a body; another to hear, and in the body the soul is
passive to this from sounds; another to produce numbers either
more slow or less so; another to remember them; and another,
330 SAINT AUGUSTINE

by accepting or rejecting, to give sentence on them all as if
by some natural right.

(6) M. Come, now, tell me which of these five is the most
excellent.

D. The fifth, I think.

M. You are right, for, unless it excelled, it could not bring
judgment on them. But again, I want to know of the other four
which you judge the greatest.

D. The kind in the memory, certainly. For I see those num-
bers are of greater duration than when they sound or are heard
or are produced.

M. Then you prefer things made to things making. For you
said a while ago those in the memory are imprinted by the
others.

D. I should rather not prefer them. But still, how can I not
prefer those of greater duration to those of less, I don't see.

M. Don't let this disturb you. For not as eternal things to
temporal are those decaying through a longer time to be pre-
ferred to those passing away in a shorter time. Because one
day's sanity is to be preferred to many days' folly. And if we
compare desirable things, one day's reading is better than many
days’ writing, if the same thing is read in one day, written in
many. So numbers in the memory, although they remain
longer than those they are imprinted by, yet it is not proper
to prefer them to those we cause, not in the body, but iri the
soul. For they both pass away, one by cessation, others by for-
getting. But those we operate seem to be snatched from us,
even though we have not yet stopped, by the succession of
those immediately following, when the first by disappearing
give place to the second, the second to the third, and contin-
uously those before to those after, until a complete stop destroys
the last. But in the case of forgetting, several numbers are
ON MUSIC 331

wiped away together, even though by degrees. For they do
not remain entire for any time. For what is not found in the
memory after a year, for instance, is also already less after a
day’s time. But this decrease is not sensed, yet it is not there-
fore falsely conjectured. Because the whole does not disappear
suddenly the day before the year is finished, and so the under-
standing grants it begins to lapse from the time it comes into
the memory. That is why we often say, ‘I vaguely remember,’
whenever we repeat something, recalling it after a time before
its complete destruction. And, therefore, both these kinds of
numbers are mortal. But things making are by right preferred
to those made.

D. I accept and approve.

(7) M. Now, then, consider the other three, and explain
which of them is the best, and so to be preferred to the others.

D. That's not easy. For, according to the rule things making
are to be preferred to those made, I am forced to give the
prize to the sounding numbers. For, when we hear we sense
them, and when we sense them we are passive to them. And
so, these last make those others existing in the ear's affection
when we hear, but, again, these we have by sensing produce in
the memory others they are rightly preferred to, since they are
produced by them. But here, because sensing and remember-
ing both belong to the soul, I am not disturbed if I should
prefer something produced in the soul to something else like-
wise produced in it. But I am disturbed how the sounding num-
bers, certainly corporeal or somehow in a body, are to be con-
sidered of more worth than those found in the soul when we
sense. And yet, again, it is disturbing how these last are not
rather to be more highly considered since they make,'and the
others are made by them.

M. Be rather amazed at the body's being able to make any-
332 SAINT AUGUSTINE

thing in the soul. For it could not, perhaps, if the body the
soul used to animate and govern without trouble and with the
greatest ease, changed for the worse by the first sin, were not
subject to death and corruption. And yet, it has a beauty of its
own, and in this way it sets its dignity off to fair advantage
in the eyes of the soul. And neither its wound nor its disease
has deserved to be without the honor of some ornament. And
the highest Wisdom of God designed to assume this wound,
by means of a wonderful and ineffable sacrament, when He
took upon Himself man without sin, but not without the condi-
tion of sin. For He was willing to be humanly born, to suffer,
and to die. None of these things was accomplished by our
merit, but by this most excellent goodness, in order we might
rather look to the pride we most deservingly fell into those
things by, than to the humiliations He undeservingly suffered,
and so with calm mind we might pay the death owed, if He,
too, was able to bear it unowed on our account, and anything
else more secret and more atoned for in such a sacrament to be
understood by saintly and more holy people. And so it is not
surprising a soul operating in mortal flesh feels the passion of
bodies. And not because it is better than the body ought all
taking place in it be considered better than all taking place in
the body. I suppose you think the true is to be preferred to the
false.

D. Who wouldn’t.

M. But what we see in our sleep isn’t a tree?

D. Not at all.

M. But its form is in the soul. And the form of what we now
see has been made in the body. And so, since the true is better
than the false, and although the soul is better than the body,
the true in the body is better than the false in the soul. But as
the latter is better in so far as it is true, not in so far as it is
made in the body, so the former is worse in so far as it is false,
ON MUSIC 333

not in so far as it is made in the soul. Have you anything to say
about this?

D. Nothing, certainly.

M. Listen, then, to this other thing, nearer to the mark, I
believe, than ‘better.’ For you won't deny what is proper is
better than what is not proper.

D. I certainly admit that.

M. But no one doubts a man would be improper in the same
clothers a woman would be proper in.

D. That's evident.

M. Well, then, it isn't to be greatly wondered at, is it, if this
form of numbers is proper in the sounds falling on the ears,
and improper in the soul when it has them by sensing and
being passive?

D. I don't think so.

M. Why, then, do we hesitate to prefer sounding and cor-
poreál numbers to those made by them, even though they are
made in the soul which is better than the body? Because we
are preferring numbers to numbers, producers to produced,
not the body to the soul. For bodies are the better the more
harmonious [numerosiora] they are by means of these num-
bers. But the soul is made better through lack of those numbers
it receives through the body, when it turns away from the
carnal senses and is reformed by the divine numbers of wisdom.
So it is truly said in the Holy Scriptures, ‘I have gone the
rounds, to know and consider and seek wisdom and number."?
And you are in no way to think this was said about those
numbers shameful theaters resound with, but about those, I
believe, the soul does not receive from the body, but receiving
from God on high it rather impresses on the body. And what
kind of thing this is, is not to be considered in this place.

2 Eccle. 7.26.
334 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Chapter 5

(8) But, lest it turn out the life of a tree is better than
our own, because it doesn’t receive numbers from the body by
sensing (for it has no sense), it must be carefully considered if
there is really nothing called hearing unless something is pro-
duced in the soul by the body. But it is very absurd to sub-
ordinate the soul like a matter to the body as an artisan. For
the soul is never inferior to the body, and all matter is inferior
to the artisan. The soul, then, is in no way a matter subordi-
nated to the body as an artisan. But it would be, if the body
worked numbers in it. Therefore, when we hear, numbers are
not made in the soul by those we know in sounds. Or do you
think otherwise?

D. What happens, then, when a person hears?

M. Whatever it is—and perhaps we cannot find or explain
it—it won't result, will it, in our denying the soul’s being
better than the body? And when we admit this, can we sub-
ordinate it to the body working and imposing numbers, so the
body is an artisan but the soul a matter something harmonious
js made from and in? And, if we believe this, we must believe
the soul is inferior to the body. And what more miserable and
detestable thing than this can be believed? And since things are
thus, I shall try as much as God will help me to conjecture
at and discuss whatever lies there. But if, because of the infirm-
ity of either or both of us, the result should be less that we
wish, either we ourselves shall investigate it at another time
when we are less agitated, or we shall leave it to more intel-
ligent people to examine, or, unworried, we shall leave it
unsolved. But we must not for that reason let these other more
certain things slip from our hands.

D. I shall hold that as unshaken if I can, and yet I shouldn't
wish that secret place to remain impenetrable to us.
ON MUSIC 335

(9) M. shall say right away what 1 think. But you must
either follow or go ahead of me, if you can, when you see me
stop and hesitate. For I think the body is animated by the
soul only to the purpose of the doer. Nor do I think it is affected
in any way by the body, but it acts through it and in it as
something divinely subjected to its dominion. But at times it
acts with ease, at times with difficulty, according as, propor-
tionately to its merits, the corporeal nature yields more or less
to it. And so, whatever corporeal things are taken into this
body or come into contact with it from without, have in the
body itself, not in the soul, some effect either opposed to its
operation or agreeing with it. And so, when it fights the body’s
opposition and with difficulty throws the matter subjected to
it into the ways of its operation, it becomes more attentive to
the actions because of the difficulty. And this difficulty on ac-
count of the attention, when not unobserved, is called feeling,
and this is named pain or trouble. But when what is taken in
or touches it easily agrees, all that or as much as is necessary
is projected into the course of its operation. And this action
of the soul by which it joins its body to an outside body har-
monizing with it, since it is accomplished more attentively
because of an unusualness, is not unobserved, but because of
the harmony is felt with pleasure, But when those things the
soul uses to mend the wear and tear in the body are lacking,
need follows. And when the soul becomes more attentive on
account of the difficulty of the action and this operation does
not pass unobserved, then this is called hunger or thirst or
some such thing. But when there is a superfluity of things taken
in, from the burden of these is born a difficulty of operation
and an awareness accompanies the issue. And since this action
does not pass unobserved, indigestion is felt. It also operates
with attention when it gets rid of the superfluity: if smoothly,
with pleasure; if roughly, with pain. The soul also occupies
336 SAINT AUGUSTINE

itself attentively with any sickly disturbance of the body, de-
siring to succor it as it declines and disintegrates. And when
this action does not pass unobserved, it is said to feel sickness
and illness.

(10) In short, it seems to me the soul, when it has sensa-
tions in the body, is not affected in any way by it, but it pays
more attention to the passions of the body. But this sense,
even while we do nat sense, being nevertheless in the body, is
an instrument of the body directed by the soul for its ordering
so the soul may be more prepared to act on the passions of the
body with attention to the end of joining like things to like
and of repelling what is harmful. Further, I think, it operates
something luminous in the eyes, a most clear and mobile air
in ears, something misty in the nose, something damp in the
mouth, something earthy and muddy you might say in the
touch. But whether these are put together in this way or by
some other distribution, the soul acts quietly if the things
within are in unity of health as if they agreed to some domestic
pact. But when things affecting the body, you might say with
otherness, are applied, it exerts more attentive actions ac-
comodated to certain places and instruments. Then it is said
to see or hear or smell or taste or touch. And by such actions it
willingly associates proper things and resists improper ones. I
think the soul, then, when it senses, produces these actions on
the passions of the body, but does not receive these passions.

(11) And so, when we now examine the numbers of
sounds and the sense of hearing is called into doubt, it isn't
necessary to digress any longer. Let's return, then, to the ques-
tion, and see if sound causes anything in the ear. Or do you
deny that it does?

D. Not at all.
ON MUSIC 337

M. Well, you agree ears are an animated member?

D. 1 do.

M. Since, then, what in this member is like air is moved
when the air is moved, we don't believe, do we, the soul, with
a vital motion quickening in silence the body of the ears before
this sound, can either stop from the work of moving what it
animates, or can move the air of the ear now moved extrin-
sically in the same way it moved before the sound slipped in?

D. It seems it must be in another way.

M. Then, to move it in another way, mustn't it be said to
act, not to be acted on?

D. That's true.

M. So we are not absurd in believing the movements of the
soul, or its actions or operations—find any easier name you
can—do not escape the soul’s notice when it senses.

(12) But these operations are applied to these passions of
the body either as when figures interrupt the light of our eyes,
or sound enters the ears, or odors move into the nostrils, or
savors to the palate, and to the rest of the body solid and
bodily things; or as when something runs and crosses from
place to place in the body itself; or as when the whole body is
moved by its own weight or that of another. These are opera-
tions the soul applies to these passions of the body, delighting
the soul when it agrees with them, offending it when it opposes
them. But when it is affected by its own operations, it is
affected by itself, not by the body. But clearly when it adapts
itself to the body, it is less with itself, because the body is
always less than it is.

(13) And so, when the soul is turned from its God to its
servant, it is necessarily deficient; but, when it is turned from
its servant to its God, it necessarily progresses and furnishes its
servant a very easy life, and, therefore, the least laborious and
338 SAINT AUGUSTINE

full of business, no attention being given it in its surpassing
peace. Just so is the bodily affection called health. Indeed, it
needs none of our attention, not because the soul then does
nothing in the body, but because it does nothing more easily.
For in all our operations the greater the difficulty we operate
with, the more attentively we do it. But this health will be the
most firm and certain when this body will have been restored
to its former stability, in its own time and order. And this its
resurrection is properly believed before it is fully understood.
For the soul must be ruled by the superior, and rule the in-
ferior. But God alone is superior to it, and only body is inferior
to it, if you mean the soul whole and entire. And so as it cannot
be entire without the Lord, so it cannot excel without a ser-
vant. But as its Lord is greater than it, so its servant is less. And
so, intent on its Lord, it understands His eternal things and is
greater, and its servant, too, is greater in its kind through the
soul itself. But when the Lord is neglected, intent on its servant
with the carnal concupiscence it is seduced by, the soul feels the
movements it gives its servant, and is less; yet not so inferior
as its servant, even when it is at the lowest in its own nature.
But the body by this offense of its mistress is much less than
it was, since she was much greater before it.

(14) And so, for one now mortal and fragile, it is dom-
inated with great difficulty and attention. And from there does
this error fall upon the soul that it esteems the body’s pleasure
because the matter yields to its attention, more than it esteems
its health needing no attention. No wonder it is involved in
troubles, preferring unquiet to security. But a greater unquiet
arises for one turning back to God for fear he be turned away.
And it is so until the push of carnal business, excited by daily
habit and inserting itself into the heart of the conversion by
disorderly memories, comes to rest. When a man’s movements
ON MUSIC 339

that carry him away into outside things have been in this way
quieted, then he enjoys an interior freedom of peace signified
by the sabbath. So he knows God alone is his Lord, and He is
served with the greatest freedom. But, although he starts those
carnal movements as he wishes, he does not stop them as he
wishes. For, again, the reward of sin is not in his power as sin
itself is. For, indeed, this soul is a thing of great worth, and
yet it doesn’t remain apt for suppressing its own lascivious
movements. For it sins in its strength, and by divine law made
weaker after sin it is less able to undo what it has done. ‘Un-
happy man I am, who will deliver me from the body of this
death? The grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Then a movement of the soul, conserving its force and not yet
extinct, is said to be in the memory. And, when the mind is
intent on something else, it is as if that previous movement
were not in the mind and were lost, except, before it dies away,
it be renewed by some affinity of similar things.

(15) But have you anything to say to the contrary?

D. You seem to me to say what is probable, and I shouldn’t
dare oppose.

M. Since, then, feeling itself is a moving the body against the
movement made in it, don’t you think then we do not feel
when bones and nails and hair are cut, not because these are
not at all alive in us, for otherwise they would neither be held
together nor be fed nor grow, nor show their strength in be-
getting their kind. But because they are penetrated with an air
less free or mobile than is necessary for the soul’s causing a
movement there so rapid as that movement it is against when
it’s said to feel. Although some such life is understood in trees
and other vegetation, it is nowise proper to prefer it, not only
to our own life exceeding it in reason, but also to that of brutes.

3 Rom, 7.24-25.
340 SAINT AUGUSTINE

For it is one thing not to sense because of very great solidity,
and another not to sense because of very great health of body.
For in the one case the instruments moving relatively to the
passions of the body are lacking, and in the other these passions
themselves are lacking.

D. I approve and agree.

Chapter 6

(16) M. Let's get back to the problem proposed, and
tell me, of the three kinds of numbers, one in the memory,
the other in sensing, and another in sound, which of these
seems to you the most excellent.

D. I put sound after these other two, both in the soul and
in some sense living. But of these last two I am uncertain which
I consider superior. But, perhaps, since we said those in action
are to be preferred to those in the memory only because the
ones are active and the others are caused by them, so for the
same reason it is proper to prefer also those in the soul while
we are listening to those in the memory caused by them. That's
the way it seemed to me before.

M. I don't think your reply absurd. But since it has been
argued those numbers in sensing are also operations of the
soul, how do you distinguish them from those we see to be
in act even when the soul in silence and not remembering per-
forms something harmonious through intervals of time? Or do
the ones belong to the soul moving itself with respect to its
body, while those others inhering belong to the soul moving
itself with respect to the body's passions?

D. 1 accept this distinction

M .Well, do you think it acceptable those relative to the
body be judged superior to those relative to the body's
passions?
ON MUSIC 341

D. Those existing in silence seem to me to be freer than those
exerted not only on the body but also on the body’s passions.

M. It seems we have distinguished five kinds of numbers and
ordered them in some sort of scale of merits. And if you will,
we shall impose names proper to them, to avoid in the rest of
our discourse using more words than things.

D. Very willingly.

M. Then let the first be named judicial, the second advanc-
ing [progressores], the third reacting [occursores],* the fourth
memorial, the fifth sounding.

D. I understand and I am glad to use these names.

Chapter 7

(17) M. Come now, tell me, which of these seems to
you undying, or do you think they all fall in their time and
die?

D. I think the judicial alone are undying. For the others, I
see, either pass away when they are made or are striken out
of the memory by forgetfulness.

M. You are just as certain, then, of the immortality of the
first as you are of the destruction of the others? Or is it proper
to inquire more diligently whether they are undying?

D. Let’s look into the matter thoroughly.

M. Say, then, when I pronounce a verse sometimes longer,
sometimes shorter, provided I comply with the law of times
putting feet in a one-two ratio, I don't offend the judgment of
your senses with any kind of hitch or fraud, do I?

D. Not at all.

M. Well, but that sound, given out in shorter and, you

4 Occursores is here translated as ‘reacting,’ but with the understand-
ing, of course, that the sounding numbers cause the reacting numbers
only as something like occasional causes.
342 SAINT AUGUSTINE

might say, faster syllables, it can’t occupy more time than it
sounds, can it?

D. How can it?

M. Then, if those judicial numbers are time-bound in just
the interval the sounding numbers were disposed in, can they
hope to judge those other sounds based on the same iambic
law, but slower?

D. In no way.

M. Then it appears those judicial numbers are not confined
to a span of time.

D. It certainly appears so.

(18) M. You are right in agreeing. But if they are con-
fined to no interval, then no matter how slowly I should emit
iambic sounds in regular intervals, they could still be used for
judging. But now, if I should say a syllable of such a stretch
as three steps in walking (to make it small), and another syll-
able double that, and if I should order the succeeding iambs
at such a pace, then the law of one to two would nevertheless
be preserved. And yet we couldn't apply that natural judg-
ment to confirming these measurements, could we?

D. I can't deny you seem right, for my opinion of the matter
is very simple.

M. Then the judicial numbers are also confined to certain
limits of time-spans they cannot exceed in their judgments.
And whatever exceeds these intervals, they find no way to
judge. And if they should be confined in this way, I do not see
how they are immortal.

D. And I don't see what I can say to that. Although now
I shall be less forward in presuming on their immortality, yet
I do not understand how they are in this way proved mortal.
For it is possible whatever intervals they can judge they can al-
ways judge, since I cannot say they are destroyed as the others
ON MUSIC 343

by forgetfulness, or their length of time is so long as ἃ sound’s
movement, or of such a stretch as reacting numbers, or as the
numbers we have called advancing, impelled in time and pro-
longed in length. For each of these passes away with the time
of its operation. But the judicial remain certainly in the nature
of man, whether also in the soul I do not know, to pass judg-
ment on things given even if varied within certain lengths, by
approving harmonies in them and rejecting discords.

(19) Μ. At least you concede some men are more quickly
offended by discordant numbers, some more slowly, and most
judge them defective only by the comparison with sound ones
on hearing them agree and disagree.

D. I agree to that.

M. Well, what do you think this difference arises from, if
not from nature or practice or both?

D. That's true.

M. Then, I want to know if someone at sometime could
pass judgment on and approve longer intervals than another
could.

D. I believe that's possible.

M. Well, anyone who can't, if he should practice properly
and should not be really dull, could, couldn't he?

D. Certainly he could.

M. But he couldn't go so far as to judge even longer inter-
vals, comprehending in that judicial sense intervals in the
ratio of one to two hours or days or months or years (for they'd
at least be hindered by sleep) and approving them as iambs of
motion.

D. They can't.

M. Why can't they do so? Unless it's because to each living
thing in its proper kind and in its proportion with the universe
is given a sense of places and times, so that even as its body
344 SAINT AUGUSTINE

is so much in proportion to the body of the universe whose part
it is, and its age so much in proportion to the age of the uni-
verse whose part it is, so its sensing complies with the action it
pursues in proportion to the movement of the universe whose
part it is? So this world, often called in Sacred Scriptures by
the name of heaven and earth, is great by containing all things
whose parts being all diminished in proportion it remains just
as large, or increased in proportion it still remains just as large.
For nothing is large of itself in space and time-stretches, but
with respect to something shorter; and again nothing is small
of itself, but with respect to something larger.’ And so, if
there is attributed to human nature for the actions of carnal
life a sense such that it cannot pass judgment on greater
stretches of times than the intervals pertaining to the use of
such a life demand, then, since this nature of man is mortal,
so I think also this sense is mortal. For it is not for nothing
custom is called a sort of second and fitted-on nature, But
we see new senses in the judging of this kind of corporeal
things, built up by custom, by another custom disappear.

Chapter 8

(20) But whatever kind of thing these judicial num-
bers may be, they are certainly superior to any other in this,
that we doubt and with difficulty find out if they are mortal.
But of the other four kinds there is no question they are
mortal. And although they do not embrace some members

5 Just as the thing rhythmed was considered only às ἃ matrix for ratios,
30 here the extended world is such a matrix, and so is the sensible life
of man. Being then belongs more to the relations that to the relata
and this doctrine will find its keystone in the Trinity where the
distinction of Persons involves a certain primacy of relations. It is
interesting to note in this connection that Boethius, who mentions
Augustine, carefully pointed this out in his discussion of the categories
of Aristotle in his De Trinitate.

ON MUSIC 345

of these four classes because they have been extended beyond
their laws, yet they appropriate the kinds themselves for their
very consideration. For even the advancing numbers, when
they seek a certain harmonious operation in the body, are
modified by the secret will of the judicial numbers. For what-
ever restrains and keeps us from walking with unequal steps,
or from beating out in unequal intervals, or from eating or
drinking with uneven motions of the jaw, and from scratching
with unequal motions of the nails, or to be brief, from unequal
movements in any application of ourselves to doing something
with our bodily members, and tacitly demands a certain
equality, that very thing is something judicial, I don’t know
what, introducing God the builder of the animal, properly
believed to be the author of all fittingness and agreement.

(21) And these reacting numbers, brought forth certainly
not according to their own will, but in virtue of the body’s pas-
sions, in so far as the memory can keep their intervals, just so
far they given over to the judgment of the judicial are numbers
and are judged. For the number consisting in time-intervals
can in no way be judged by us unless we are aided in the judg-
ing by memory. For any syllable, no matter how short, since
it begins and stops, has its beginning at one time and its end-
ing at another. Then it is stretched over some little interval
of time and stretches from its beginning through its middle to
an end. So reason finds spatial as well as temporal intervals
have an infinite division and so no syllable’s end is heard with
its beginning. And so, even in hearing the shortest syllable, un-
less memory help us have in the soul that motion made when
the beginning sounded, at the very moment when no longer
the beginning but the end of the syllable is sounding, then we
cannot say we have heard anything. And from this it often
comes about, being occupied with another thought, we do not
346 SAINT AUGUSTINE

in conversation seem to have heard even ourselves. This is not
because the soul does not at that time put in motion those re-
acting numbers, since certainly the sound reaches the ears, and
the soul cannot be idle at its body’s passion and since it cannot
move differently than if that passion of the body should occur,
but because the impetus of the motion is immediately blotted
out by the attention [intentio] on something else, an impetus
which, if it remained, would remain in the memory so we
would also know and feel we had heard. But if a rather slow
mind follows not too easily what reason discovers in the case
of a short syllable, in the case of two syllables there’s certainly
no doubt no soul can hear both at the same time. For the
second does not sound unless the first stops. For how can what
cannot sound together be heard together? Then, as the diffu-
sion of rays shining out into the open from tiny pupils of the
eye, and belonging therefore to our body, in such a way that,
although the things we see are placed at a distance, they are
yet quickened by the soul, so, just as we are helped by their
effusion in comprehending place-spans, the memory too, be-
cause it is somehow the light of time-spans, so far comprehends
these time-spans as in its own way it too can be projected. But
when a sound beats a longer time on the ears, in no way ar-
ticulated and again another, double it, or equal it, is added on
from some stopping place or another, then that motion of the
mind, created by its attention on the past and finished sound
in its transition, is repressed by its attention on the contin-
uously succeeding sound, and so it does not remain in the
memory. And so mustn’t these judicial numbers be thought of
as extended in a certain interval of time? For they can’t judge
the numbers situated in the time-spans unless the memory
should come to their assistance, with the exception of the ad-
vancing numbers whose very advance they regulate. But there
intervene the time-spans where we forget or remember what
ON MUSIC 347

they judge. And so we cannot judge round or square or any
other solid definite things in those bodily forms which are
properly objects of the eyes, unless we turn them around to the
eyes. But when one part is seen, if for that reason it should
blot out what is seen in another, then the attention of the per-
son judging would be in vain, because it, too, is accomplished
in a certain time-span. And it is up to memory to see to this
diversity.

(22) But it is much more evident we judge memorial
numbers by judicial when the memory itself presents them.
For, if reacting numbers are judged in so far as they are pre-
sented by it, much more are those found to live in the memory
itself which are brought back by memory itself as if they had
been stored up by other applications of our attention. For what
else do we do when we recall to memory except examine some-
how what we've stored up? But a motion of the mind, not
destroyed, runs back into our cogitation on the occasion of
similar ones, and it's this that's called remembering. And so,
either in thought alone or also in the movement of our mem-
bers, we enact numbers we have already enacted sometime or
other. But for that reason we know they haven't just come, but
come back into our cogitation, because whenever they were be-
ing committed to memory, they were repeated with difficulty,
and we needed prior practice in order to follow through. And
with this difficulty overcome, when the numbers offer them-
selves without trouble and at will, comformably to the times
and in their proper order, so easily, indeed, those inhering
more forcibly come forth as if of their own will even while we
are thinking of something else, we then feel they are not new.
There is also another thing, I think, giving us to feel the pres-
ent motion of the mind has already existed at some time: that
is, to recognize when we compare by an interior light of some
348 SAINT AUGUSTINE

sort the recent, and certainly more lively, movements of the
action we are in the midst of when we remember, with the now
more composed memorial numbers. And such knowledge is
recognition and remembering. Then the memorial numbers
are also judged by these judicial numbers, never alone, but
along with active or reacting numbers or with both, bringing
them from their hiding-places to the light, and recalling these
numbers, lost before and now brought to life again. So, since
the reacting numbers are judged in so far as the memory
presents them to those judging, in turn the memorial numbers
can be judged as the reacting numbers exhibit them. So this is
the difference: for the reacting numbers to be judged, the
memory presents what might be called recent traces of their
flight, but when we hear and judge the memorial numbers,
the same traces relive with the passage of the reacting numbers.
Now, why do we need to say anything further about the sound-
ing numbers, since, if they are heard, they are judged in the
reacting numbers? But if they sound where they can’t be heard,
who doubts they can’t be judged by us? And just as in sounds
with the ears as instruments, so in dancing and other visible
motions, we judge, by means of these same judicial numbers
with the help of the memory, whatever pertains to temporal
numbers.

Chapter 9

(23) Since things are so, let us try if we can and tran-
scend those judicial numbers and see if there are any super-
ior to them. Although in the case of these judicial numbers
we now see a minimum of time-spans, yet they are only applied
for judging those things in a time-span, and not even all such,
but only those articulated memory-wise. Do you object to this?

D. The force and power of these judicial numbers moves
me to the utmost. For it seems to me it's to them the functions
ON MUSIC 349

of all the senses are referred. And so, I don’t know whether
among numbers any thing more excellent than these can be
found.

M. There is nothing lost in our looking more carefully. For,
either we shall find in the human soul superior ones, or, if it
should be clear there are none in it higher, we shall confirm
these to be the highest in it. For it is one thing not to be, and
another not to be capable of being found either by us or any
man. But I think when that verse Deus creator omnium we
quoted is sung, we hear it through reacting numbers, recog-
nize it through memorial numbers, pronounce it through ad-
vancing numbers, are delighted through judicial numbers, and
appraise it by still others, and in accordance with these more
hidden numbers we bring another judgment on this delight, a
kind of judgment on the judicial numbers. Do you think it’s
the same thing to be delighted by sense and to appraise by
reason?

D. I admit they are different. But I am disturbed first by the
name. Why aren't those called judicial numbers where reason
rather than where delight resides? Second, I fear this appraisal
of reason is only a more diligent judgment of judicial numbers
concerning themselves. Not one kind of number in delight and
another in reason, but one and the same kind of number
judges at one time those produced in the body when memory
presents them as we just proved, and at the other times of
themselves, in a purer manner and more remote from the body.

(24) M. Don't worry about names; the thing is in the
meaning [potestas]. Names are imposed by convention, not by
nature. But your thinking them the same and not wishing to
accept them as two kinds of number—the same soul's doing
both, I guess, wrings that out of you. But you must notice in
350 SAINT AUGUSTINE

advancing numbers the same soul* moves the body or moves
to the body, and in reacting numbers the same soul goes to
meet its passions, and in memorial numbers it fluctuates in
motions, you might say, until they somehow subside. And so
we see the motions and affections of one nature, that is, the
soul, in these kinds which are necessarily enumerated and dis-
tinguished. And, therefore, if, as it is one thing to be moved
to those things the body is passive to, and this is done in
sensing; another, to move oneself to the body, and this is
done in operating; another, to hold in the soul what is got-
ten from these motions, and that is to remember; so it is
one thing to accept or reject these motions either when they
are first produced or when revived by the memory, and this
is done in the delight at the fitness or in the distaste at the
absurdity of such movements or affections; and another thing
to appraise whether they delight rightly or not, and this
is done by reasoning—if all this is true, then we must admit
these last are of two kinds just as the first are of three kinds.
And, if we have been right in our judgment, the very sense
of delight could not have been favorable to equal intervals
and rejected perturbed ones, unless it itself were imbued with
numbers; then, too, the reason laid upon this delight cannot
at all judge of the numbers it has under it, without more pow-
erful numbers. And, if these things are true, it appears five
kinds of numbers have been found in the soul, and, when you
add to these those corporeal numbers we have called sounding,
you will see six kinds of numbers in rank and order. And now,
if you will, let those that tried to take first place be called
sensuous, and those found to be more excellent receive the
name of judicial numbers, since that is more honorable. And
again I think the name of sounding numbers ought to be

6 I read eamdem animam for eadem animam in Migne, an obvious mis- .
print not in Benedictine Edition.
ON MUSIC 351

changed, since, if they should be called corporeal, they will
also evidently signify those involved in dancing and in any
other visible motion. Do you approve, then, of what’s been
said?

D. I do. For it seems to me both true and evident. And I am
willing to accept your corrections in vocabulary.

Chapter 10

(25) M. Well, now examine the force and power of
reason in so far as we can examine it in its works. For reason
itself, to mention the most extraordinary thing it attains in its
operation, first has considered what is good mensuration, and
scen it to be in a free movement, and directed it to the end
of its own beauty. Then it saw there was something in the
movements of bodies varying in the brevity and length of time,
in so far as it was greater or less in time, and something else
varying in the beat of spatial intervals in certain degrees of
swiftness and slowness. After this division, it articulated into
different numbers whatever was in a time-stretch by means of
moderate intervals convenient to the human senses, and fol-
lowed through their kinds and order to the measurements of
verses. Lastly, it turned its attention to what the soul it's the
head of would do in the measuring, operating, sensing, and
retaining of these things. And it separated all these numbers
of the soul from bodies. And it saw itself could not notice,
distinguish or rightly enumerate all these things without cer-
tain numbers of its own, and it set them above the others as of
an inferior order, by means of a kind of judicial appraisal.

(26) And now of its own delight, that looks so closely
into the balancings of times and shows its decisions in measur-
ing these numbers, it asks this question: ‘What is it we love
in sensible harmony?' Nothing but a sort of equality and
352 SAINT AUGUSTINE

equally measured intervals, isn’t it so? Does the pyrrhic foot
or spondaic or anapestic or dactylic or proceleusmatic or dis-
pondaic delight us for any other reason than its comparing
the one of its parts to the other by an equal division of itself?
And what beauty does the iamb, trochee, or tribrach have if
not the division of their greater part into two such as their
lesser? And, too, do the six-time feet sound more smooth and
gay except through their division according to either law:
that is, either into two equal parts with three times each, or
into one part single and the other double; that is, so the
greater part is twice the less and is in this way divided equally
by it, since the four times are measured off and cut in two
by the two times? What about the five and seven-time feet?
How is it they seem more adapted to prose than to verse, if
not because their smaller part does not divide their larger
in two? And yet, whence are they themselves admitted in the
order of their own kind to the numberliness of times, if not
because the smaller part also in the five-time foot has two
such sub-parts as the greater has three, and in seven-time
feet the smaller three such as the greater four? So in all feet,
no measuring net marks off any least part others as many as
possible are not equal to.

(27) Consider in the case of feet joined together, whether
this conjoining be continued on as far as one wishes as in
rhythms, or whether it be restrained by some definite end as
in meters, or whether it be divided into two members sym-
metrical to one another by some law as in verses—by what
now other than equality is one foot in accord with another?
And how is it the molossus’ and ionic’s middle syllable, a
long one, can be divided, not by division, but by the will of
the person reciting and beating time, into two equal moments,
so even the whole foot is in harmony with each three-time
ON MUSIC 353

part when it is added to others divided in the same way?
Isn’t it only because the law of equality dominates, that is,
because it’s equal to its sides, each of two times, and it itself
is of two times? Why can’t the same thing be done in the case
of the amphibrach when it is added to other four-time feet,
if it isn’t because an equality of this sort isn’t found there,
the middle syllable being double and the sides single? Why
in rests isn’t our sense offended by a deficiency, if not because
what is due that same law of equality, although not in sound,
is yet made up in spread of time?’ Why, too, is a short syllable
taken for a long one when followed by a rest—and not by
convention, but by natural consideration directing the ears—if
not because by the same law of equality we are prevented,
in a longer time-span, from forcing the sound into a shorter

7 There is more in this sentence than meets the eye. In the first place
we have here the appearance in rhythm of the being of non-being. The
rest, the absence ot a sensible motion, is itself the object of the time-
count and plays its role on the same level as a sensible sound. Its
absence is counted by the ‘spread of time’ (spatium temporis). This
is the forerunner of the distentio animi of the Confessions, all of
which is certainly tied in with Plotinus' doctrine of td parakoloüithema
in his treatise On Time and Eternity: ‘What it means then to say
[time] is the accompaniment of movement . .. .’ (III. 7.10.1-2), For
the essential point of Plotinus attack on Aristotles "Time-is-the-
number-of-movement’ theory is that there is something like the
synthesis of the constantly recurring motions which necessitates an
intellectual accompaniment of the motion. For, without this there
would be no unity of the past and present, no one magnitude to be
numbered. Nor can the movement itself establish its own homogeneity
so that it can be said for instance that the daily motion of the
heavens is always equal to itself. It is the intellectual accompaniment
which in view of equality considers one or another cydic move-
ment in the sensible world as equal one cycle to another and so
perceives an order there. ‘For on the one hand one will refer a body
moving for such and such a time to the [uniform] movement of such
and such magnitude (for it is the principle) and to its time. But the
time of this movement, on the other hand, one will refer to the
movement of the soul which divides out the equal intervals’ (Enm.
III. 7.13.58-62) . So in mechanical theories the choice of equal motions
is made with a view to the convenient ordering of all the others.
One should hasten to add this docs not reduce time to a purely

354 SAINT AUGUSTINE

time? And so the nature of hearing and passing over in silence
allows the lengthening of a syllable beyond two times: so
what is also filled with rest can be filled with sound. But
for a syllable to occupy less than two times, with a span left
and rests at will, is a sort of deception of equality, because
there can be no equality in less than two. And finally in the
case of that equality of members, the circuits the Greeks call
beríodoi are varied by and verses are formed by, how is a
return made somehow to the same equality unless the mem-
bers joined together as unequals be found to have a force of
equality so that in the circuit the shorter member harmonize
in beat with the greater by equal feet, and in the verse by a
more subtle consideration of numbers?

(28) And so reason wonders and asks the sensuous delight
of the soul which reserves to itself the judicial role whether,
when an equality in the number of time-spans pleases it, any
two short syllables one hears are really equal, or could it be one
of them is pronounced longer, not to the long syllable's meas-
ure, but a little under, yet enough to exceed its like. You can't
deny this is possible, can you, when the soul's delight does not
sense these differences, but delights in unequals as equals?

psychological being. Any thing perceived by an act of the intellect is
an object in its own right.

It is mot too far-fetched. perhaps. to consider along with these
texts of Plotinus and Augustine a text of Aristoxenus: ‘It is clear that
the comprehending of melody is the anying with hearing and
understanding of the notes gone by y every difference’ (For
melody like the other parts of music is in becoming) ... For the
comprehension of music consists of these two, sensing and memory.
For we must sense what is becoming and remember the become. There
is no other way to follow the things of music’ (Harmonica I 38,
29-393) .

The doctrine of Augustine certainly starts with these same terms
and insights. Obviously, the doctrine of creation ex nihilo and of the
Incarnation will force him to more inteliectualist conclusions. Sce
Guitton, Le temps et l'etérnité chez Plotin et St. Augustin (Paris 1933) ,
which, however, does not treat the problem profoundly enough

ON MUSIC 355

And what is worse than this error and inequality? And so we
are advised to turn away from the enjoyment of things imitat-
ing equality. For we cannot perceive whether they perfectly
fill out their time, although we can perhaps perceive they
do not perfectly do so. And yet in so far as they imitate we
cannot deny they are beautiful in their kind and order.

Chapter 11

(29) Lets not, then, be envious of things inferior to
ourselves, and let us, our Lord and God helping, order our-
selves between those below us and those above us, so we are
not troubled by lower, and take delight only in higher things.
For delight is a kind of weight in the soul. Therefore, delight
orders the soul. ‘For where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also.’* Where delight, there the treasure; where the
heart, there happiness or misery. But what are the higher
things, if not those where the highest unchangeable undis-
turbed and eternal equality resides? Where there is no time,
because there is no change, and from where times are made
and ordered and changed, imitating eternity as they do when
the turn of the heavens comes back to the same state, and
the heavenly bodies to the same place, and in days and months
and years and centuries and other revolutions of the stars
obey the laws of equality, unity, and order. So terrestrial
things are subject to celestial, and their time circuits join
together in harmonious succession for a poem of the universe.

(30) And so many of these things seem to us disordered
and perturbed, because we have been sewn into their order
according to our merits, not knowing what beautiful thing
Divine Providence purposes for us. For, if someone should be

8 Matt. 621.
356 SAINT AUGUSTINE

put as a statue in an angle of the most spacious and beautiful
building, he could not perceive the beauty of the building
he himself is a part of. Nor can the soldier in the front line
of battle get the order of the whole army. And in a poem,
if syllables should live and perceive only so long as they
sound, the harmony and beauty of the connected work would
in no way please them. For they could not see or approve
the whole, since it would be fashioned and perfected by the
very passing away of these singulars. So God has ordered the
man who sins as vicious, but not viciously. For he has been
made vicious by will, thus losing the whole he who obeyed
God’s precepts possessed, and has been ordered in part so
who did not will to fulfill the law has been fulfilled by the
law. But whatever is fulfilled by the law is also fulfilled
justly; and whatever justly is not fulfilled viciously, because
God’s precepts possessed, and has been ordered in part so he
far as he is man is something good. But whatever is unchaste
in so far as it is unchaste is a bad work. But man for the
most part is born of unchastity, that is to say, from man’s
bad work, God’s good work.

(31) And so, to return to the subject all this was said
for, these numbers are pre-eminent by virtue of the beauty of
ratio. And if we were absolutely separated from them, then
whenever we should be disposed to the body, the advancing
numbers would not alter the sensuous numbers. But by mov-
ing bodies they produce the sensible beauties of times. And so
reacting numbers are also made opposed to sounding num-
bers. And the same soul receiving all its own motions mul-
tiplies, you might say, in itself, and makes them subject to
recall. And this force it has is called memory, a great help in
the everyday business of this life.

(32) Then whatever this memory contains from the
ON MUSIC 357

motions of the mind brought to bear on the passions of the
body are called phantasíai in Greek. And I don't find in Latin
anything I should rather call them. And the life of opinion
consists in having them instead of things known and things
perceived, and such a life is at the very entrance of error. But
when these motions react with each other, and boil up, you
might say, with various and conflicting winds of purpose,
they generate one motion from another; not indeed those
impressed from the senses and gotten from the reactions to the
body's passions, but like images of images, to which we give
the name phantasms. For my father I have often seen I know,
in one way, and my grandfather I have never seen, another
way. The first of these is a phantasia, the other phantasm.
The first I find in my memory, the last in that motion of my
mind born of those the memory has. But it.is difficult both
to find out and to explain how they are born. Yet, I think,
if I had never seen human bodies, I could nowise imagine
them by thinking with a visible form. But what I make from
what I've seen, I make by memory. Yet it's one thing to find
a phantasia in the memory and another to make a phantasm
out of the memory. And a power of the soul can do all
these things. But it is the greatest error to hold even true
phantasms for things known, although in both kinds there
is that we say, not absurdly, we know, that is, we have sensed
such and such things, or imagined them. After all, I am not
afraid to say I had a father and a grandfather. But I should
be mad to say it is they themselves my mind holds in the
phantasia or phantasm. But some follow their phantasms
so headlong the only ground for all false opinions is to hold
phantasias or phantasms for things known, known by the
senses. And so let us resist them as much as we can, nor so
fit our mind to them that, while our thinking is on them, we
believe we see them with the understanding.
358 SAINT AUGUSTINE

(33) And this is why, if numbers of this kind, coming
to be in a soul given over to temporal things, have a beauty
of their own, yet, even though they continually effect it by
passing away, this beauty is grudged by a Divine Providence
born of our punishable mortality merited by God’s most just
law, where yet He has not so forsaken us we may not turn
back and be fetched again from the delight of the carnal
senses, under the spread of His merciful hands. For such a
delight strongly fixes in the memory what it brings from the
slippery senses. And this habit of the soul made with flesh,
through carnal affection, in the Holy Scriptures is called the
flesh. And it is struggling with such a mind in that apostolic
sentence: ‘In mind I serve the law of God, but in flesh the
law of sin.? But when the mind is raised to spiritual things
and remains fixed there, the push of this habit is broken,
too, and, being little by little repressed, is destroyed. For it
was greater when we followed along with it; not altogether
nothing, but certainly less when we check it. And so with a
determined retreat from every wanton movement where lies
the fault of the soul’s essence, and with a restored delight
in reason’s numbers, our whole life is turned to God, giving
numbers of health to the body, not taking pleasure from it;
which happens when the exterior man is corrupt, even when
there is a change for the better.

Chapter 12

(34) . But the memory not only takes in the carnal
motions of the mind, and we have already spoken of these
numbers, but also the spiritual motions I shall now speak of
briefly. For in so far as they are simpler, they demand fewer
words, and the greatest possible serenity of mind. That equal-

9 Rom. 7.25.
ON MUSIC 359

ity we could not find sure and fixed in sensible numbers, but
yet we knew shadowed and fleeting, the mind could never
indeed desire unless it were known somewhere. But this could
be nowhere in the spans of places and times; for those swell
up and these pass away. Where, then, do you think, tell me,
if possible. For you don't think it's in the forms of bodies,
and you'll never dare say they are equal by pure experiment;
nor in intervals of times where we do not know whether
they are insensibly longer or shorter than they should be. I
want to know where you think that equality is on seeing
which we desire certain bodies or motions of bodies to be
equal, and on more careful consideration we dare not trust

them.
D. There, I think, where it is more excellent than bodies,

but whether it is in the soul itself or above the soul I do
not know.

(35) M. If, then, we look for that rhythmical or metrical
art we use for making verses, do you think it possesses the
numbers verses are made by?

D. I can't suppose anything else.

M. Whatever these numbers are, do they seem to you to
pass away with the verses or to remain?

D. 'To remain, certainly.

M. Therefore, it must be agreed some things that pass away
are made from some numbers that remain?

D. Reason forces me to agree.

M. Well, you don't think this art is other than some affec-
tion of the artisan's minds, do you?

D. So I believe.

M. Do you believe this affection also to be in one unskilled
in this art?

D. Nowise.
360 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. And in the one having forgotten it?

D. Not even in the one himself unskilled even though he
has been skilled at some time or other.

M. Well, if anyone reminds him by questioning, do you
think those numbers return to him from the persons question-
ing, or he moves himself to something within his own mind
whence returns to him what he had lost?

D. I think he does it within himself.

M. You don't think, by questioning, he could also be for-
cibly reminded which syllable is short or which is long if
he has forgotten completely, do you? Since by an old agree-
ment and custom of man, to some syllables a lesser, to others
a greater stretch is given. For indeed if it were by nature
or by discipline fixed and stable, then the learned men of
our time would not have lengthened some syllables the an-
cients shortened, nor shortened some they lengthened.

D. I believe this can be so, since however much is forgotten
can again be brought to memory by a remindful questioning.

M. I can't believe you think anyone by questioning could
get you to remember what you ate a year ago.

D. I confess I couldn't, and I don't think now I could be
reminded about syllables whose spans were completely for-
gotten.

M. Why so, except because, in the noun Italia, the first
syllable by the will of certain men is shortened, and now by
the will of others lengthened? But that one and two should
not be three and that two should not be the double of one,
none of the dead or living or of those to be can bring it about.

D. Evidently not.

M. What, then, if we asked very clearly all the other
things pertaining to numbers the way we have with one and
two, and if one were questioned, unskilled, not by forgetting,
ON MUSIC 361

but because he had never learned? Don’t you think then he
could likewise know this art except for the syllables?

D. How doubt it?

M. How, then, do you think he would move himself so
these numbers may be impressed on his mind, and make that
affection called art? Or will the questioner give them to him?

D. I think he does it within himself this way that he under-
stands the things asked to be true and replies.

(36) M. Come, tell me now whether these numbers under
discussion seem to you to be changeable?

D. Nowise.

M. Then you don’t deny they’re eternal.

D. I admit it.

M. Well, is there no lingering fear some inequality won't
spoil them?

D. Nothing at all is surer for me than their equality.

M. From where, then, must we believe what is eternal and
unchangeable to be given the soul if not from the eternal
and unchangeable God?

D. I don't see what else to believe.

M. Well, then, isn't it evident he, who under another's
questioning moves himself within to God to know the un-
changeable truth, cannot be reminded by any outside warn-
ing to see that truth, unless his memory hold his own same
movement?

D. It's evident.

Chapter 13

(37) M. I wonder, then, how he falls away from the
contemplation of these things to need another's recalling it
to his memory. Or must the mind even when intent on it
be thought to require such a return?

D. I think so.
362 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. Let us see, if you will, what this could be could so incite
to turn away from the contemplation of the highest and un-
changeable equality. For I only see three kinds. For the mind
is either intent upon something equal when it is turned away
or something higher or lower.

D. There is need only to discuss two of them, for I see
nothing superior to eternal equality.

M. Then, do you see anything could be equal to it and
yet other?

D. I don't.

M. It only remains, then, to inquire what the lower is.
But don't you think first of the soul avowing that equality
to be certainly unchangeable, but knowing it itself changes
from its intuiting at one time this equality and at another
time something else and so following the variety of time, not
found in eternal and unchangeable things, works this and that?

D. 1 agree.

M. Then this affection or motion of the soul by which
it understands eternal things and counts temporal things
below them even within itself and knows these higher things
are rather to be desired than those lower, don't you think
that's prudence?

D. I certainly do.

(38) Μ. Well, then, don't you think it worth pondering,
at once there's not in the soul the inhering in eternal things,
there's yet in it the knowing they should be inhered in?

D. I want us very much to ponder this, and I want to know
how it comes about.

M. You will easily see, if you notice the things we direct
the mind to most, and have the greatest care for. For I
think they're those we very much love, isn't that so?

D. No others.
ON MUSIC 363

M. Say, then, we can only love beautiful things, can't we?
For, although some people seem to love ugly things, those the
Greeks commonly call saprophíloi, it is yet a matter of how
much less beautiful they are than those things pleasing most
people. For, clearly, no one loves those things whose foulness
his sense is offended by.

D. It's as you say.

M. These beautiful things, then, please by number, where
we have shown equality is sought. For this is found not only
in that beauty belonging to the ears or in the motion of bodies,
but also in the very visible forms where beauty is more usually
said to be. Don't you think it's only equality when equal num-
bers reply to equal numbers in twos, but in ones, when they
have a mean place so equal intervals are kept for them on
each side?

D. I certainly do.

M. What is it in light itself holding the origin of all colors
(for color also delights us in the forms of bodies), what is
it in light and colors we seek if not what suits the eye? For
we turn away from too great a flare, and we are unwilling
to face things too dark, just as also in sounds we shrink from
things too loud, and do not like whispering things. And this
is not in the time-intervals, but in the sound itself, the light,
you might say, of such numbers, whose contrary is silence,
as darkness to colors. When, then, we seek things suitable
for the way of our nature and reject things unsuitable we yet
know are suitable to other living things, aren't we here, too,
rejoicing in some law of equality when we recognize equals
allotted in more subtle ways? This can be seen in smells and
tastes and in the sense of touch—and for this a long time
to follow out more clearly but very easy to explore. For
there's not one of these sensibles doesn't please us from equal-
ity or likeness. But where equality and likeness, there number-
364 SAINT AUGUSTINE

liness [numerositas]. In fact, nothing is so equal or like as
one and one, isn’t that so?
D. I agree completely.

(39) Μ. Well, didn't we persuade ourselves a while ago
the soul effects these things in bodies, and doesn't suffer
Írom bodies?

D. We did.

M. Then the love of acting on the stream of its bodily pas-
sions turns the soul away from the contemplation of eternal
things, diverting its attention with the care of sensible pleasure;
it does this with reacting numbers. But the love of operating
on bodies also turns it away, and makes it restless; this it does
with advancing numbers. The phantasias and phantasms
turn it away; these it does with memorial numbers. Finally,
the love of the vainest knowledge of such things turns it away;
this it does with sensible numbers where lie rules of an art,
as if glad in their imitation. And from these is born curiosity
by its very care an enemy of peace, and in its vanity impotent
over truth.

(40) But the general love of action turning away from
the true arises from pride by which vice the soul has preferred
imitating God to serving God. And so it is rightly written
in Holy Scripture: "The beginning of man's pride is to fall
from God," and ‘The beginning of all sin is pride. What
pride is could not have been better shown than where it is
said: ‘What does earth and ashes take pride in, since in
its own life it gives up its inmost things? For since the
soul is nothing through itself—for it would not otherwise
be changeable and sufler a flight from essence—since then
through itself it is nothing, but whatever it is is from God,

10 Eccli. 10. 14, 15, 9, 10.
ON MUSIC 365

staying in its order, it is quickened in mind and conscience by
the presence of God Himself. And so it has this good inmost.
And so to puff with pride is to go forth to the outermost and,
we might say, to become empty, that is to be less and less.
But to go forth into the outermost what is that but giving up
the inmost things, that is, putting yourself away from God,
not in the span of places, but in affect of mind?

(41) But that appetite of the soul is to have under it
other souls; not of beasts as conceded by divine law, but
rational ones, that is, your neighbors, fellows and companions
under the same law. But the proud soul desires to operate on
them, and as much as every soul is better than every body,
just so much does the action on them seem more excellent
than on bodies. But God alone can operate on rational souls,
not through a body, but through Himself. But such is the
state of sin that souls are allowed to act upon souls moving
them by signifying by one or the other body, or by natural
signs as look or nod, or by conventional signs as words. For
they act with signs by commanding or persuading, and if there
is any other way besides command and persuasion, souls act
with or upon souls. But by rights it has come about those
souls wishing to be over others command their own parts
and bodies with difficulty and pain, in part being foolish in
themselves, in part, oppressed by mortal members. And so
with these numbers and motions souls set upon souls by, with
the desire of honor and praise they are turned away from
thé sight of that pure and entire truth. For God alone honors
the soul making it blessed in secret when it lives justly and
piously before Him.

(42) The motions the soul thrusts upon those cleaving

to it and servant to it, then, are like the advancing ones, for
it acts as if on its own body. But those motions it thrusts
366 SAINT AUGUSTINE

out, wishing to attach some to itself or to enslave, are counted
as reacting motions. For it acts as if in the senses forcing a
thing moving up outside to become one with it, and a thing
not able to do so to be kept out. And the memory takes in
both these motions, and makes them memorial, likewise boiling
up in tumultuous fashion with the phantasias and phantasms
of these acts. Nor are there lacking the corresponding judicial
numbers seeing what moves suitably and unsuitably in these
acts, not wrongly to be called sensible, for it is by sensible signs
souls act toward souls. What wonder if the soul wound up in
so many and great concerns is turned away from the con-
templation of the truth? And it sees it in so far as it breathes
free of them. But, because it has not yet turned them out, it
cannot remain there. And so it is the soul has not at once the
knowledge of where it ought to be and the power to be there.
Do you agree?
D. Nothing, I daresay, to the contrary.

Chapter 14

(43) M. What’s left, then? Since we have considered
as far as possible the stain and oppression of the soul, isn’t it
to see what action is divinely commanded it for its return,
after purgation and forgiveness, to peace, and for its entry into
the joy of its Master?

D. Yes.

M. And what more do you think there's for me to say when
Holy Scripture, in so many volumes endowed with such au-
thority and holiness, exhorts us only to love our God and Lord
with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind,
and to love our neighbor as ourself? If, then, we refer all those
motions and numbers of human action to this end, we shall
certainly be cleansed. Isn't it so?
ON MUSIC 367

D. It certainly is, but how short this is to hear, and how hard
and arduous to do.

(44) M. What, then, is easy? To love colors and voices
and sweets and roses and soft bodies? Is it then easy for the
soul to love these things where it only desires equality and like-
ness, yet, considering a little more carefully, knows hardly the
last shadow and trace of them? And is it difficult for the soul
to love God thinking upon whom, as thoughts till then upon
mean and sickly things allow, it finds these nothing unequal,
nothing unlike, nothing divided in places, nothing changed in
time? Or is there rather delight in throwing up a vast extent
of building and passing the time in works of this kind where
if the numbers please—there's nothing else—what can there
be called equal and like, the discipline's reason would not
laugh to scorn? And if this is so, why then does it sink from the
truest height of equality to these things, and build up earthly
machines in its own ruins? Was this not promised by Him who
knows not to deceive? ‘For my yoke,’ He says, ‘is light! The
love of this world is more wearisome. For, what the soul
seeks in it, constancy and eternity, it does not find, since the
lowest beauty is finished out with the passage of things, and
what there imitates constancy is thrown through the soul by
the highest God. For the form [species] changeable only in
time is prior to that changeable both in time and place. And
just as souls have been told by the Lord what to love, so they
are told through the Apostle John what not to love. ‘Do not
love this world,’ he says; ‘because all things in the world are
concupiscence of the flesh, concupiscence of the eyes, and
secular ambition."'*

(45) But what manner of man do you think this is, re-

11 Matt. 11.80.
12 1 John 2.

368 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ferring all those numbers from the body and over against the
body’s passions and held from them by memory, not to carnal
pleasure, but only to the body’s health? A man referring all
those numbers operating on souls bound to him or those num-
bers put out to bind them, and therefore sticking within the
memory, not to his own proud excelling, but to the usefulness
of those souls themselves? A man also using those numbers in
either kind as directing, in the role of moderators and examin-
ers of things passing in the senses, not for an idle or harmful
curiosity but for a necessary approval or disapproval? Doesn’t
such a man work all these numbers and yet not get caught in
them? For he only chooses the body’s health not to be hindered,
and refers all those actions to the good of that neighbor he has
been bidden to love as himself in the natural tie of common
right.
D. You talk of a great and very manlike man.

(46) Μ. It’s not those numbers below reason and beauti-
ful in their kind do soil the soul, then, but the love of lower
beauty. And whenever the soul finds to love in it not only
equality, concerning which we have said enough for this
work, but also order, it has lost its own order. Nor yet does
it depart from the order of things even at this point, and so
it is whenever and however a thing is, it is highly ordered. For
it is one thing to keep order and another to be kept by order.
That soul keeps order that, with its whole self, loves Him
above itself, that is, God and fellow souls as itself. In virtue
of this love it orders lower things and suffers no disorder from
them. And what degrades it is not evil, for the body also is a
creature of God and is adorned in its own beauty, although of
the lowest kind, but in view of the soul’s dignity is lightly es-
teemed, just as the value of gold is degraded by a mixture with
the finest silver. And so whatever numbers result from our
ON MUSIC 369

criminal mortality, we shall not except them from the making
of Divine Providence, since they are beautiful in their own
kind, but let us not love them to become happy in their enjoy-
ment. For we shall keep free of them since they are temporal,
by using them well, as with a board in a flood by not throwing
them aside as burdensome and not grasping them as stable.
But the love of our neighbor commanded us is our most cer-
tain ascent to inhere in God and not so much to be kept by
His ordering as to keep our own order firm and sure.

(47) Or perhaps the soul does not love order as even
those sensible numbers attest? But how, then, is the first foot
a pyrrhic, the second an iamb, the third a trochee, and so on?
But in this law you will have rather told the following of
reason, not of sense. Well, isn't this so of sensible numbers that
when say eight long syllables take up as much time as sixteen
short ones, yet the shorts look rather to be mixed with the
longs? And when reason judges of sense and for it proceleus-
matic feet are declared equal to the spondaic, it finds here
only the power of ordering, because long syllables are only long
in comparison with short syllables, and again short syllables
are only short in comparison with long. And so the iambic
verse, no matter how long it's pronounced, if it does not lose
the rule of one and two, does not lose its name. But that verse
consisting of pyrrhic feet with the gradual lengthening of its
enunciation becomes suddenly spondaic, if you consult not
grammar with music. But if it is dactylic or anapestic, since
longs are perceived by comparison with shorts mixed in, no
matter how long its enunciation, it keeps its name. Why are
additions of half feet not to be kept with the same law, in the
beginning as at the end; nor all used, although fitting the
same beat? Why the sometime placing of two shorts rather
than one long at the end? Aren't they measured off by sense
370 SAINT AUGUSTINE

itself? Nor in these is there found an equality-number, suffer-
ing no change, but only a bond of order. It would take too
long to go over all the other things like this having to do with
the numbers of times. But even the senses reject visible forms,
either leaning the wrong way or upside down, and like things,
where it’s not the inequality—for the equality of the parts
remains—but the perverseness that’s condemned. And finally
in all our senses and works when we familiarize many unusual
and therefore unpleasing things by gradual steps to our taste,
we first accept them with a kind of toleration and then gladly,
haven’t we kept our pleasure with order, and don’t we turn
from them unless the first are harmoniously bound with the
middle, and the middle with the last?

(48) And so, let us put our joy neither in carnal pleasure,
nor in the honors and praises of men, nor in the exploring of
things touching the body from without, having God within
where all we love is sure and unchangeable. And in this way
it comes to be, when temporal things are present, yet are we
not involved in them, and those things outside the body can be
absent without sense of pain, and the body itself taken away
with little or no sense of pain and brought back transformed
by the death of its nature. For the soul’s attention in the di-
rection of the body contracts endless business, and the love of
some special work to the neglect of universal law, a work yet
inseparable from the universe of God’s rule. And so who
loves not the law is subject to the law.

Chapter 15

(49) For if, for the most part, thinking intently on
things incorporeal and being always what they are, we mean-
while effect temporal numbers in some bodily movement, easy
and useful, by walking or singing, then they pass straight
ON MUSIC 371

through us unnoticed, although they would not be were we
not acting. And then, if, when we are occupied in our empty
phantasms, likewise these, too, pass by as we act without feel-
ing, how much more and more constantly ‘when this corrupt-
ible has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on
immortality,"? that is, to speak plainly, when God has vivified
our mortal bodies, as the Apostle says, ‘for the spirit remaining
in us."* How much more, then, intent on one God and mani-
fest truth, face to face, as it's said, shall we feel with no
unquietness and rejoice in the numbers we move bodies by.
Unless perhaps one is to believe the soul, although it can
rejoice in things good through it, cannot rejoice in the things
its good from.

(50) But this action the soul, its God and Master willing,
extracts itself from the love of an inferior beauty by fighting
and downing its own habit that wars against it; on that point
of victory within itself over the powers of this alloy from whose
envious desire to entangle it, it soars to God—its support
and station—isn't such an action for you called the virtue
temperance?

D. I see and understand.

M. Well, when it advances along this way, now divining
eternal joys nor quite grasping them, no loss of temporal things
nor any death can deter it from saying to weaker fellows, can
it: ‘It is good I be dissolved and be with Christ; but for your
sakes it is necessary to remain in the flesh'?!*

D. So I think.

M. And this disposition where it fears neither adversity nor
death, that can only be called fortitude, can’t it?

D. I see that.

13 I Cor. 15.

14 Rom. 8.1
15 Phil. 1

53.

372 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. Now, this ordering itself, according to which it serves
only one God, desires to be co-equal to only the purest souls
and to have dominion only over animal and corporeal nature,
what virtue do you think that is?

D. Who doesn’t know that’s justice?

M. Right.

Chapter 16

(51) But now I want to know, when we decided a
while ago among ourselves prudence to be the virtue the
soul knows its proper station by, its ascent to it being through
temperance, that is, conversion of love to God called charity,
and aversion from this world attended by fortitude and justice,
I want to know whether you think when it will have come to
the fruit of its delight and zeal by perfect sanctification, by
that perfect vivification, too, of its body, and, the swarm of
phantasms wiped from its memory, will have begun to live with
God Himself for God alone, when will have been fulfilled that
divinely promised us in these words: 'Beloved, now we are
sons of God, and it has not yet appeared what we shall be.
We know when He will have appeared we shall be like Him,
since we shall see Him as He is,"—I want to know then
whether you think these virtues we've recalled will then be
there too.

D. I don't see, when those things the fight’s about have
passed by, how either prudence can be there, only choosing
what to follow in opposition, or temperance, only turning
love from things opposed, or fortitude, only bearing up under
things opposed, or justice, only desiring to be equal to the most
blessed souls and to master its lower nature in opposition,
that is, not yet in possession of that it desires.

16 1 John 32.
ON MUSIC 373

(52) M. Your reply is not absurd so far. And I don't deny
it has seemed this way to certain learned men. But I, on con-
sulting the books whose authority none surpasses, found this
said, "Taste and see, since the Lord is sweet." The Apostle
Peter also puts it this way: ‘If yet you have tasted, since the
Lord is sweet."* I think this is what is effected in those virtues
purging the soul by conversion. For the love of temporal things
could only be dislodged by some sweetness of eternal things.
But when it has come to what is sung, ‘But the sons of men
will hope under the cover of your wings; they will be drunk
of the abundance of your house, and you will give them to
drink in a torrent of pleasure; for in you is the fountain of
life,’ it does not say the Lord will be sweet to taste, but you
see what a flood and flow is said of the eternal fountain; even
a drunkenness follows on it. And by this name is wonderfully
signified, it seems to me, that forgetfulness of secular vanities
and phantasms. Then the rest follows, and it says, ‘In your
light we shall see light. Stretch forth your mercy to those know-
ing you.’ ‘In light’ is to be taken as in Christ, who is the
Wisdom of God, and is often called light. When therefore it is
said ‘We see,’ and ‘knowing you,’ it can’t be denied there'll be
prudence there. Or do you think the true good of the soul
can be known where there’s no prudence?

D. I now understand.

(53) M. Well, can there be those right in heart with-
out justice?

D. I know justice is very often signified by this name.

M. Then isn't it that the same prophet later says when he
sings, ‘And your justice to those who are of right heart’?

D. Evidently.

17 Ps. 33.9.
18 I Peter 2.3,
374 SAINT AUGUSTINE

M. Come, then, recall if you will we have already sufficiently
expounded the soul lapses by pride into certain actions of its
own power, and neglecting universal law has fallen into doing
certain things private to itself, and this is called turning away
from God.

D. I remember, certainly.

M. When, therefore, it acts, so this never again delights it,
doesn't it seem to you to fix its love in God and to live most
temperately and chastely and securely away from all filth?

D. It seems to be.

M. See, then, too, how the prophet goes on saying, ‘Let not
the foot of pride come upon me.’ For, saying ‘foot’ he signi-
fies the distraction or fall, and in freedom from this the soul
inheres in God and lives eternally.

D. I agree and follow.

(54) M. Then fortitude remains. But as temperance
against the lapse in the free will, so fortitude avails against the
force anyone can be broken by if less strong in the face of
attackers or if wretchedly lying down. And this force is usually
well signified in the Scriptures by the name of hand. Then
who besides sinners try to apply this force? Well, in so far as
the soul is barricaded through this very thing and secured by
God's support so nothing befalls it from anywhere, it sustains
an enduring and you might say impassible power called forti-
tude; and I think this is said when it is added, ‘Nor let the
hand of sinners disturb me.’*

(55) But whether this or something else is to be under-
stood by these words, will you deny the soul fixed in that per-
fection and blessedness sees the truth, remains unspotted,
suffers no harm, is subject to the one God, and rises above
other natures?

19 Ps. 35.8.12.

ON MUSIC 375

D. I don't see how it can otherwise be absolutely perfect and
blessed.

M. Then, either this contemplation, sanctification, impas-
sibleness, and ordering of it are those four virtues perfected
and consummated, or, not to split hairs over names when the
things fit, instead of these virtues the soul in labor uses, some
such powers are to be hoped for it in eternal life.

Chapter 17

(56) We have only recalled what belongs most to this
present discussion, that all this is done by God’s Providence
He has created and rules all things through, so even the sinful
and miserable soul may be moved by numbers and set num-
bers moving even to the lowest corruption of the flesh. And
these numbers can be less and less beautiful, but they can’t
lack beauty entirely. But God, most good and most just,
grudges no beauty whether fashioned by the soul’s damnation,
retreat, or perseverance. But number also begins from one, and
is beautiful in equality and likeness, and bound by order. And
so, whoever confesses there’s no nature of any kind, but desires
unity, and tries as much as it can to be like itself, and holds
its salvation as a proper order in place or time or weight of
body, must confess all things whatever and of any size are
made from one beginning through a form equal to it and like
to the riches of His goodness, by which they are joined together
in charity as one and one gift from one.”*

(57) And so that verse proposed by us, ‘Deus creator om-

21 For Augustine the doctrine of creation from nothing is not only an
article of faith, but a dialectical truth which follows from a sound
doctrine of oneness, It rests on the recognition of beings, objects of
the human intellect but independent of it. A scrutiny of these beings
leads immediately to the further recognition that their very being
as object supposes an absolute sufficiency in itself participated in
376 SAINT AUGUSTINE

nium,’ sounds with the harmony of number not only to the
ears, but even more is most pleasing in truth and wholeness
to the soul’s sentiment. Unless, perhaps, you are moved by the
stupidity, to speak mildly, of those denying anything can be
made from nothing, even though God Almighty be said to have
made it. Or is it rather the artisan can operate the sensible
numbers of his habit by the reasonable numbers of his art, and
by sensible numbers those advancing numbers, his numbers in
their operation move by, and time-spans belong to; and from
these again he can fashion visible forms in wood numbered
with place-spans; and the nature of things serving God’s will
cannot make this wood from earth and other elements; and
could not even make these final things from nothing? In fact
the time-numbers of a tree must precede its place-numbers.
For there’s no stem does not in fixed time-measures spring up
to replace its seed, germinate, break out into the air, unfold
its leaves, become strong, and bring back either fruit or, by
very subtle numbers of the wood itself, the force of the seed.
And how much more the bodies of animals where the placing
of the members presents a much more numbered equalness to

by all the others. This is oneness in itself, the ground of all recogni-
tion and knowledge. For Plato and Augustine, as soon as one under-
stands what it means to know, one is forced to admit oneness in
itself. Any proof which proceeds only from premises to conclusion
by the methods of discursive knowledge is insufficient. For one can
always deny premises. To find that without which one cannot even
deny premises is the task of the upward dialectic.

Since for Augustine time is a kind of unity and order contemplated
by the human intellect by which the sensible things existing seem-
ingly only at this moment and hardly existing then take on signifi-
cance and have a history, it therefore is more than the sensible things
themselves, and the acuity of such a question as that of the eternity
of motion is greatly diminished and perhaps has little meaning.
The appearance here of the phrase ‘Creator of all things’ and its
constant appearance throughout the book is indicative that the great
problem of time is to give the sensible world meaning and being
rather than to save us from the intellectual horror of self-perpetuat-
ing ‘eternal’ moving things of which time is only an abstraction.
ON MUSIC 377

sight. Can these be made of the elements and these elements
not have been made of nothing? For which among them is
more ordinary and lowly than earth. Yet first it has the general
form of body where a unity and numbers and order are clearly
shown to be. For any part of it, no matter how small, must be
extended from an indivisible point in length, third takes on
breadth, and fourth height, to fill the body. From where, then,
is the measure of this progression of one to four? And from
where, too, the equality of the parts found in length, breadth,
and height? From where a corrationality (for so I have chosen
to call proportion), so the ratio length has to the indivisible
point, breadth has to length, and height to breadth? Where,
I ask, do these things come from, if not from the highest and
eternal rule of numbers, likeness, equality, and order? And
if you abstract these things from earth, it will be nothing. And
therefore God Almighty has made earth, and earth is made
from nothing.

(58) Then, too, this form earth is differentiated from the
other elements by, doesn’t it present something one in so far as
it has received it, and no part of it is unlike the whole? And
doesn’t it have the soundest final ground in its kind by the
connection and agreement of the same parts? And the nature
of water extends above it, itself abounding in unity, more
beautiful and more pellucid because of the greater likeness of
its parts, keeping the place of order and its own soundness. And
what shall I say of the nature of air, sweeping to unity with a
greater reach and as much more beautiful than water is than
earth, and so much higher in worth. And what about the
supreme circuit of the heavens where the whole universe of
visible bodies ends, the highest beauty in its kind, and the
soundest excellence of place? Now all these things we’ve enu-
merated with the help of the carnal senses, and all things in
378 SAINT AUGUSTINE

them, can only receive and hold local numbers seemingly in a
kind of rest, if temporal numbers, in motion, precede within
and in silence. Likewise, a vital movement measures off and
precedes these as they move in time-spans, a vital movement
serving the Master of all things, having in its numbers no
temporal spans divided out, but with a power providing
times." And above this power, the rational and intellectual
numbers of the blessed and saintly souls?? transmit the very
law of God no leaf-fall breaks and our hairs are numbered by,
to the judgments of earth and hell, without toll from any
nature between.

(59) I in my littleness have gathered with you what I
could and as I could on such great matters. But, if any read
this talk of ours committed to writing, they must know these
things have been written by persons much weaker than those
who, having followed the authority of the two Testaments, by
believing, hoping, and loving, venerate and worship the con-
substantial and unchangeable Trinity of the one highest God
from whom, through whom, and in whom are all things. For
they are purified, not by flashing human reasoning, but by
the effective and burning fire of charity. And while we do

22 Augustine seems to be saying that the root of all dispersion is the
temporal and that the spatial dispersion depends upon it. He then
proceeds to enumerate the hierarchy of numbers. As Svoboda has
pointed out, we can consider this as a hierarchy of rhythms since
humerus is an ambiguous word. Conceptually it makes little difer-
ence, but rhetorically this systematic ambiguity may have great effect.
‘Time has much the same position in the system of Kant as in that
of Augustine: it is the mediating principle between the intelligibles
and the sensible world. So it is, too, for Plotinus.

23 "The rational and intellectual numbers of the blessed and saintly
souls’ refer, as Augustine points out in Retractationes 1.11.8, to the
angels. He finds the word ‘souls’ inappropriately used.

This whole book is a bold development of the traditional Platonic
phrase stemming from Xenocrates: fsyché arithmós autón hinon-
"The soul is a self-moving number.’

ON MUSIC 379

not think those the heretics deceive with the promises of
reason and false science ought to be neglected, yet, in the con-
sideration of the ways themselves, we go more slowly than holy
men who deign not to wait in their flying ascent. And yet we
should dare not do this if we did not see that many pious sons
of that best of mothers, the Catholic Church, who in their
youthful studies have sufficiently developed the faculty of
speaking and arguing, have, for the confuting of heretics, done
this same thing.
INTRODUCTION

E ^ 373, the ninetcen-year-old Augustine was lured
into an attachment with the Manichaeans; in 382,
RB when he came to know one of the most prominent
among them, the highly reputed Faustus, the enchantment was
dispelled and the attachment ended.’ While in those nine years
Augustine never passed from the lower Manichaean grade of
‘Hearer’ to that of one of the *Elect," his eminence among
them was such that his withdrawal occasioned them deep re-
gret.' Whatever the extent to which he actually embraced the
tenets of the heresy, he certainly acquired a detailed knowl-
edge of Manichaean doctrine and usages, evidence of which is
abundant in the long series of works he directed against the
Manichaeans, especially in the years between his ordination
to the priesthood (391) and his consecration as bishop(395).
Among the earliest of these works and by no means the least
important is the present treatise, The Advantage of Believing
(De utilitate credendi).
While this work is not a text from which to learn in detail
the full nature and content of the Manichaean heresy,’ it is
in order here to inquire how the Manichaeans could draw to

1 See De ulilitate credendi 8.20. On Augustine and Manichaeism see also
. Confessions, Bks, 3
2 Sce De util. cred. 1.2 and note thereon.
3 CC. Secundini Manichaei. Epistola, to which St. Augustine's Contra
Secundinum Manichaeum is a reply (both works in Migne, PL 42).
4 "Lhe passages cited below on De util. cred. 1.2 are elective summaries
by St. Augustine himself on the Manichaean position; (cf.
Conf. 8.8.1, 5.9), A convenient bibliography of St. Augustine's
ant ichaean writings and of modern studies im Manichaeism
pears in Hugh Pope, O.P., Saint Augustine of Hippo (London 1937

83 mn. 6, 7.
383

384 SAINT AUGUSTINE

themselves the passionately truth-hungry Augustine and to hold
him for nearly a decade. The causes were manifold: "The
Manichaeans attracted him’—to quote Dr. Anton C. Pegis’s
recent summation of the matter?—'for various reasons. They
appeared, by their promises at least, to be able to satisfy im-
portant intellectual and moral difficulties. Their materialism
and dualism, eternal warring principles, eased his inability to
avoid conceiving God in a material way, and, by absolving
the individual from moral guilt, soothed his tortured con-
science. Their pretension to scientific knowledge was a con-
siderable attraction, and Augustine remained among them by
expectation more than by conviction.’ He was to find that the
Manichaean claim to scientific knowledge—to truth and to
reason which had no need of the prior action of faith—was
indeed a pretension and nothing more. He was to find, too,
that the Manichaeans’ rejection of the Old Testament and
their corollary that whatever in the New Testament confirmed
and guaranteed the Old was interpolated* were insupportable
positions, taken by men whose right to judge the Old Testa-
ment was initially violated by their having declared, in princi-
ple, a merciless hostility to them.’ Here indeed are the two
chief preoccupations of the book: (1) to vindicate the true
position of authority in matters of religion and to justify the
priority of belief over reason, and (2) to refute the negative
position of the Manichaeans concerning the Old Testament.
While the second task is more elaborately accomplished in
other writings, the The Advantage of Believing penetrates the

5 ‘The Mind of St. Augustine, Mediaeval Studies 6 (1944) 1-2. Dr.
Pegis's treatment of ‘Faith and Wisdom’ in St. Augustine (pp. 12-19)
draws frequently on the De. util. cred.

6 De util. cred. 2.4 If.; De haeresibus 46; Conf. 5.11; De moribus ecclesiae
Catholicae 12.

7 De util. cred. 6.13.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 385

first problem in a manner that is deep and close to definitive.
The search for wisdom to which the book bears witness was
one which, by way of the influence of St. Ambrose and certain
books of the Platonists, was to lead to the fruitful retirement
at Cassiciacum and to the author's last days at Milan, from
which the deeply-searching work The Immortality of the Soul
was to issue, as also the first part of On Music, both trans-
lated in the present volume.

As with St. Augustine’s treatment of Manichaeism in the
Confessions, so here his argument is set against a background
of his personal history. The book may indeed be seen, as
Batiffol observed,? as a first sketch of the relevant passages of
the later work. We are given glimpses of the author’s school-
boy days,!° of his youthful quest for truth,” and finally of his
tortuously reached conclusion that his search for truth among
the Manichaeans had been in vain.'*

The autobiographical turn of the work is derived in part
Írom the circumstances of its composition. It was written, as its
author tells us,!* ‘to a friend whom I knew to have been taken
in by the Manichaeans and to be still held in that error, derid-
ing in the discipline of the Catholic faith the fact that men

8 The judgment of J. Martin (quoted by Pegis, op. cit. 15 n. 68) on
one passage (18.28) of this portion of the De util. cred. is stril
"the most vigorous page, and. more than this, the only completely
irue page on this subject written by an eminent philosopher from
Aristotle to Kant and after.’

9 P. Batiffol, "Autour de De utilitate credendi de Saint Augustin; Revue
Biblique, Nouv. Serie 14 (1917) 1l. Batiffo's article as a whole
(pp. 9-53) is useful especially as culling from other writings of
St. Augustine parallel statements of the principal themes of the
De util. cred.

10 Cf. De util. cred. 6.13.

11 Ibid. 1.1-2 and passim.

12 Ibid. 820.

13 Retractationes 1.14. The detailed comments made in this work on par-
ticular passages of the De util. cred. are found below in the notes to
the translation.

386 SAINT AUGUSTINE

were bid to believe but were not taught, by reason most cer-
tain, what truth was.’ More than one passage of the work
indicates that Augustine and Honoratus were not only both
Manichaeans but had become so in consequence of earlier
common experiences and aspirations.'* Nothing more than
what the present book tells is surely known about the Honora-
tus in question. If he is the Honoratus addressed in St.
Augustine Letter 140 (hardly written to a Manichaean),'*
we see that success waited upon St. Augustine’s appeal here!"
that Honoratus should ‘follow the path of Catholic teaching,
which has come down to us from the Apostles through Christ
Himself, and will continue hence to posterity.’

Since St. Augustine, in his Retractations, lists the De
utilitate credendi first among those of his writings which fol-
lowed his ordination to the priesthood (391), the date of
composition is reliably established.

The present translation is based on Zycha's text in the
Vienna Corpus. The translator has occasionally profited from.
consulting the English rendering of C. L. Cornish? and the
more recent Italian translation of the Barnabite Father,
Domenico Bassi, whose introduction and notes have also been
especially useful. An edition by C. Marriott (1869 and
1885)?' has not been available to the translator, nor the

14 See especially De util. cred. 1.1, 4.10, 6.13.

15 There is no reason to connect him with the presbyter referred to in
Letter 83 or with the bishop addressed in Letter 228.

16 Letter 140 (cf. ca. 412) is a not inconsiderable treatise De gratia Novi
Testamenti. The Honoratus who had asked the five questions which
the book answers (ci. Retract. 2.36) was not yet baptized (Letter
140 19.48) .

17 De util. cred. 8.20.

18 Retract. 1.14.

19 See below, Select Bibliography. Earlier English renderings are those
in Seventeen Short Treatises by Saint Augustine (Oxford 1886) and,
according to Pope, op. cit. 369, one by H. de Romestin (1885).

20 Noted by Pope, loc. cit.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 387

German renderings of K. Frh. v. Piesport (Fulda 1771)and
F. M. Berghaus (Münster 1808) and the Italian of N. Casacca
(Florence 1930). Except where St. Augustine’s Biblical quota-
tions showed significant departures from the Vulgate (when
adaptation had to be made), quotations from the Holy Script-
ures have been taken from the Reims-Douai version as revised
by Bishop Challoner.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

Attention need here be drawn to the critical text used in the present
translation, that o£ J. Zycha, im Corpus Scriptorum | Ecclesiasticorum
Latinorum XXV. (Vienna 1891) 1-18; to the (sometimes more readable)
Maurist text, now most conveniently found in J. P. Migne, Patrologia
Latina 42 (Paris 1841) 63.92; to the English rendering of the Rev.
C. L. Cornish, in A Select Library of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers,
First Series, ΠῚ (Buffalo 1887) 317-366; and to the Latin text (Maurist)
with introduction, Italian translation and notes by P. Domenico Bassi
(Corona Patrum Salesiana, Serie Latina, IT) , (Turin 1936); the same
volume gives text and annotated translation of the De moribus ecclesiae
Catholicae and the De moribus Manichaeorum. The most valuable mono-
graph on the De util. cred. is that of. Batiflol cited above. See also the
final paragraph of the Introduction.

CONTENTS

Chapter Page
1. Augustine’s purpose in writing to Honoratus. The argu-
ment of the work. How the author was deceived by
the Manichaeans . . 0.5. .891
2. The Manichaean charge against the ola “Testament . 395
3. The four modes of understanding the Old Testament:
history, aetiology, analogy, allegory. The veiled mys-
teries of the Old Testament. . . 396

4. The three errors which may be committed i in ‘reading . 402
5. The three uL differences in connection with
writing 5 . 405
6. No credence to be given to exposition ‘of the ‘Scriptures
by those hostile to them : a". 6 0

7. On the search for true religion . . . . . « . 409
8. How the author became a Catholic . . . . . . 415
9. Faith prescribed to its candidates by the Catholic
Church; reason promised to theirs by the heretics .
10. Believing in matters of religion not shameful . . . 419
11. How believers are free from the temerity of opinion.
On understanding, believing and opinion . . . 423

12. The manifold necessity in human society of believing . 426
13. Belief in the existence of wisdom a prerequisite to

searching for it . . . 429
14, With the banishment of all belief αὶ goes ; belief i in the very

existence of religion . . . 431
15. The incarnate Wisdom of God a most opportune road

to religion 2 5 e. 435
16. Divinely constituted authority leads us to faith 2 1490
17. The advantage of being persuasive in the matter of

good peu c uc I uu Ῥὗ

18. Concluding exhortation . . . . . . . . .440
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING

Chapter 1

F I WERE to believe, Honoratus,' that a heretic and a
man who believes heretics were one and the same, I
should think it well to rest both my tongue and my

pen in this matter. Now, actually, there is a vast difference

between these two. The heretic, in my opinion, is one who
for some temporal advantage, especially for the sake of glory
and preeminence, originates or follows false and new opin-
ions. But he who believes men of this kind is deceived by
a certain image of truth and piety. Under these circum-
stances, I-did not think I should be silent before you as to
my views of finding and retaining truth. And you know how
ardently I have loved it from my youth. But truth is far
removed from the minds of the vain men who, having gone
too far in these corporeal things, mistakenly think nothing
else exists except what they perceive with the five well-known
messengers of the body. The impressions and images they
receive from these they revolve within themselves even when
they try to get away from the senses, and, according to the
fatal and utterly false standard supplied by these impressions
and images, they think that they can accurately measure the
ineffable mysteries of truth. Nothing is easier, my dear friend,
than not only to say but even to think that one has found

truth; but, how difficult it is in reality you will realize, I

trust, from this letter of mine. That it may be profitable to

you, or at least in no way harm you and all those into whose
hands it may accidentally come, has been and is the object
of my prayers to God. And I am hopeful that this will be

1 On Honoratus see Introduction.

391
392 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the outcome, in that I am fully conscious that I have taken
up my pen devoutly and dutifully without any desire for
empty fame or worthless ostentation.

(2) It is, accordingly, my purpose to prove to you, if I
can, that the Manichaeans are sacrilegiously and rashly attack-
ing those who, following the authority of the Catholic faith,
before they can gaze upon that truth which pure minds behold,
are, by believing, both fortified in advance and prepared for
God who will enlighten them. And you know, Honoratus,
that for no other reason did we fall in with such men than
that they kept saying that by pure and simple reason, apart
from all formidable authority, they would lead their willing
listeners on to God and free them from all error. For, what
else forced me for almost nine years, during which time I
rejected the religion which my parents had implanted in me
as a child,’ to follow these men and diligently to listen to them,
save that they said we were terrified by superstition, and that
faith was demanded of us before reason, while they, on the
other hand, were forcing faith on no one without first hunting
for and disentangling the truth. Who would not be enticed by
these promises? And would there not be special enticement for
a youthful mind desirous of truth, and yet haughty and talka-
tive in disputations in the school of certain learned men? Such
a one they then found me, spurning, of course, what seemed
to be old wives’ tales and desiring to get hold of and drink in
the sincere and open truth which they promised. But, again,
what reason kept me from embracing them completely so that
I remained in that rank which they call Hearers? (so as not
2 Cf. Conf. 1,11; 5.14.

8 The Manichaeans of the lower rank. Members of the upper rank were
called the *Elect' and employed rigid ascetic practices not required of

the ‘Hearers.’ For St. Augustine's account of these two classes and a

brief statement concerning Manichaean doctrine and discipline, see his
De haeresibus 46.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 393

to lose the hope of this world together with its affairs), except
that I noticed that, they themselves also were more fluent and
eloquent in refuting others than they were strong and sure in
proving their own beliefs? But what shall I say about myself,
I who was already a Catholic Christian? Almost exhausted,
and parched after this excessive period of thirst, with intense
desire I again sought these breasts [of Holy Mother Church],
and, weeping and groaning deeply, I beat them violently and
wrung them out that there might trickle forth just enough
nourishment to refresh me, affected as I was, and to restore
the hope of life and safety. What, then, shall I say about my-
self? You, not yet a Christian, since you were vehemently
denouncing them, could scarcely be persuaded by me that you
had to hear and investigate them. By what else were you de-
lighted—please try to recall, I pray—save by a certain inor-
dinate presumption and promise of reasons? But because they
disputed widely and vigorously for a long time and in much
detail over the errors of the unlearned—something which I
learned too late was very easy for anyone of average learning—
we thought that we should necessarily retain whatever they
implanted in us of their own doctrine, since we met no other
with which we might be satisfied. And so they did to us what
deceitful bird-catchers are wont to do, who fix lime-smeared
branches near water to deceive thirsty birds. These men cover
over and conceal in any way they can the other surrounding
waters or even ward off the birds by formidable devices, so
that they fall into snares, not through choice, but out of pure
need.

(3) But, why do I not reply to myself that these elegant
and charming comparisons and censures of this kind against
all who teach anything can be poured out cleverly and smartly
by any adversary? The purpose I had in mind in thinking some
394 SAINT AUGUSTINE

such admonition should be put into my letter was to urge them
to cease from such action, so that, as that famous man says,‘
when trifling commonplaces have been separated out, matter
may clash with matter, cause with cause, and reason with rea-
son. Therefore, let them cease to utter that saying, which they
have on their lips as if of necessity, whenever they are deserted
by anyone who has been a Hearer over a rather long period of
time, ‘The light hath made its way through him.’ For you see—
you, who are my greatest care (for about them I am not too
concerned) how empty this can be and how very easy for
anyone to censure. And so I leave this for your prudence to
investigate. For I am not afraid that you may think that I was
possessed by light at the time that I was entangled in the life
of this world, having a darksome hope from the beauty of my
wife, from the pomp of riches, from the emptiness of honors
and other harmful and destructive pleasures.’ And all these
(and this was not unknown to you), I did not cease to desire
and hope for, as long as I remained their attentive Hearer. Nor
do I attribute this to their teaching, for I admit that they
assiduously advise that such things be shunned. But to say that
I have been deserted by light now that I have turned away
from all these shadows of things and determined to be content
with only the necessary sustenance for bodily health, but that
I was enlightened and resplendent when I loved these things
and was held enmeshed in them, is characteristic of a man
who, to put it very gently, gives superficial consideration to
matters on which he loves to talk much. But, please, let us
come to the issue.
4 Cicero seems to be meant. See his Second Oration against Catiline 11.25
(... si his rebus omissis causas ipsas, quae inter se confligunt, conten-

dere velimus . . .)
5 Ct. Soliloquia 1.

THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 395

Chapter 2

(4) You well know that the Manichaeans, by finding fault
with the Catholic faith and, in chief, by tearing apart and
mangling the Old Testament, stir up the unlearned who surely
do not know to what extent these criticisms are to be accepted,
and how these, once swallowed, descend effectively into the
veins and marrow of souls still, as it were, emitting infant
wails; and because [in the Old Testament] there are certain
things which give some offense to souls that are ignorant and
neglectful of their own interest (and this is the largest group),
these points can be attacked from a popular point of view,
while, on the other hand, they cannot be popularly defended
by very many on account of the mysteries which they contain.
The very few who know how to do this have no liking for pub-
lic and much advertised contests in disputation, and, for this
reason, are little known except to those who seek them out most
urgently. As to the rashness, then, with which the Mani-
chaeans criticize the Old Testament and the Catholic faith,
learn, I beg of you, what disturbs me. And I desire and I hope
that you will receive these remarks in the same spirit in which
they are uttered. For God knows (and to Him are known all
the hidden thoughts of my conscience) that I engage in this
discussion with no malice. But, as I think, it should be received
for the sake of proving the truth (and for this one purpose we
had long since decided to live) ; and with incredible solicitude,
so that it may not have been very easy for me to err with you,
but very difficult (not to put it too harshly) to hold with you
the straight path. But in the expectation with which I antic-
ipate your holding the way of wisdom with me, I trust that He
will not desert me, He to whom I am consecrated. Night and
day I try to keep my gaze upon Him, and, with the eye of my
soul wounded, both because of my sins and my way of life, by
396 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the blows of spiritless opinions, often with tears I recognize my
own weakness. After long darkness and blindness, the eyes,
scarcely opened, still throbbing and turning away, refuse the
light—which they yet desire—especially if anyone tries to show
them the sun itself. This is what is now happening to me, for
I do not deny that there is a certain ineffable and singular good
of the soul which is seen with the mind, but with sighs and
tears I confess that I am not yet fit to contemplate it. He will
not then desert me, if I am not deceitful, if I am influenced by
duty, if I love truth, if I esteem friendship, if my great fear is
that you may be deceived.

Chapter 3

(5) All of that Scripture called the Old Testament is
handed down fourfold, therefore, to those eagerly bent on
knowing it: according to history, according to aetiology, ac-
cording to analogy, and according to allegory. Do not think
me inept for using the Greek words. In the first place, I
learned them in this form, and I do not dare to reveal them
to you other than as I learned them. Then, you will also
realize that we have in common use no names for these things.
If I had made them up through translation, I should surely
be all the more inept, but if I were to use circumlocution, I
would be less unhampered in discussing them. I only ask that
you believe that, howsoever I may err, I am not acting as
one swollen with pride or vanity. Things are handed down
according to history, when the teaching concerns what has
been written or done and what has not been done, but only
written as though it were done; according to aetiology, when
the reason is given as to why anything has been done or said;
according to analogy, when it is shown that the two Testa-
ments, the Old and the New, are not opposed to each other;
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 397

according to allegory, when one is taught that certain writings
are not to be taken according to the letter, but are to be under-
stood figuratively.

(6) All these ways were used by our Lord Jesus Christ
and the apostles. For that incident was taken from history in
which He was reproached because His disciples had plucked
ears of corn on the sabbath day: ‘Have you not read,’ He
said,‘ ‘what David did when he was hungry, and they that
were with him: how he entered into the house of God and
did eat the loaves of proposition, which it was not lawful
for him to eat, nor for them that were with him, but for the
priests only?” But to aetiology belongs the instance in which
His questioners, when Christ had forbidden a wife to be put
away except for fornication, protested that Moses had per-
mitted this freedom by giving a bill of divorce: ‘This,’ He said,”
Moses did ‘by reason of the hardness of your heart.’ For here
the reason was given why Moses had wisely permitted it for
a time. But this precept of Christ seemed to indicate that
now the times were other [than those of Moses]. It would be
tedious to explain the changes of these times and their order,
arranged and settled by a certain wonderful disposal of Divine
Providence.

(7) Now, furthermore, as to analogy, by which the har-
mony of the two Testaments is clearly seen, why should I say
that all those have used it to whose authority the Manichaeans
have yielded? They themselves can ponder over how much
they usually say has been interpolated into Sacred Scripture
by some, I know not what, corruptors of truth. This state-
ment has always seemed to me to be very weak, even at the
time that I was one of their Hearers; and not only to me,

1 Matt, 1234.
2 Matt. 19.8.
398 SAINT AUGUSTINE

but also (I well remember it) to you, and to all of us who
were trying to exercise a more careful judgment than the
general run of believers. But now, many things which dis-
turbed me have been explained and unraveled, especially those
matters about which in their discourses they generally boast,
and wax all the more eloquent whenever, in the absence of
an adversary, they do not have to be careful. And for all that,
they seem to me to have said nothing more shamelessly, or
to put it more gently, more carelessly or weakly, than that
the divine Scriptures have been corrupted, for no copies are
extant in so recent a matter whereby they can prove this. If
they were to say that they did not think that they could
accept the Scriptures completely, on the ground that they had
been written by men who, they thought, did not write the
truth, somehow or other their refusal would be more just or
their mistake more human. For this is what they have done
about that book which is entitled the Acts of the Apostles.
And at this plan of theirs, when I myself consider it, I
cannot sufficiently wonder. For it is not the wisdom of men
that I miss here, but the absence of average understanding. For
that book has so many things which are similar to those which
they do accept that it seems to me to be utter stupidity not
to accept it also and to consider false and interpolated what-
ever in it offends them. Or, if such language is impudent, as
it is, why do they think these things are more valid in the
epistles of St. Paul, or why in the four books of the Gospel?
And, I am inclined to think that these books contain more
things, proportionately, which they would like to consider
corrupt interpolations than the books of the Acts could pos-
sibly contain. But, without doubt, this is what seems to me
to be the situation, and I ask you to consider it with me with
a calm and serene judgment. For you know that the Mani-
chaeans, working to include the person of Manichaeus, their
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 399

founder, among the number of the apostles, say that the Holy
Spirit, whom the Lord promised He would send to His apos-
tles, came to us through him. And so, if they were to accept
the Acts of the Apostles in which the coming of the Holy
Ghost is clearly asserted, they could not find a way in which
to say that this had been interpolated. As they would have it,
there were some corruptors of the divine books before the
time of Manichaeus himself, and the corruptors were those
who were eager to combine the Jewish law with the Gospel.
But this about the Holy Spirit they cannot say, unless, per-
haps, they assert that the [authors] prophesied and put into
their books the charge which would be brought against Mani-
chaeus, who at some future time would be and would say
that the Holy Spirit had been sent through him. But about the
Holy Spirit we will speak more plainly elsewhere. Now, let us
get back to my original intention.

(8) For I think I have sufficiently demonstrated that both
the history of the Old Testament and aetiology and analogy
can be found in the New Testament; it remains to point out
allegory. Our Redeemer Himself uses in the Gospel an allegory
from the Old Testament. "This generation’, He says,‘ 'seeketh
a sign: and a sign shall not be given it but the sign of Jonas
the prophet. For as Jonas was in the whale’s belly three days
and three nights: so shall the Son of man be in the heart of
the earth three days and three nights.’ And what shall I say
about the apostle Paul, who also in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians indicates that the story of the Exodus itself was
an allegory of the future Christian people:* ‘For I would not
have you ignorant, brethren, that our fathers were all under
the cloud and all passed through the sea. And all in Moses

3 Acts. 22-4.

4 Matt. 1239-40.
5 1 Cor. 10.1-11.
400 SAINT AUGUSTINE

were baptized, in the cloud, and in the sea: And did all eat
the same spiritual food, and all drank the same spiritual
drink: (And they drank of the spiritual rock that followed
them: and the rock was Christ). But with most of them God
was not well pleased; for they were overthrown in the desert.
Now these things were figures of ourselves, that we should
not covet evil things as they also coveted. Neither let us worship
idols, as some of them, as it is written, “The people sat down
to eat and drink and rose up to play."* Neither let us commit
fornication, as some of them committed fornication, and there
fell in one day three and twenty thousand men. Neither let
us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted and perished by
the serpents. Neither let us murmur, as some of them mur-
mured and were destroyed by the destroyer. Now all these
things happened to them in figure: and they are written for
our correction, upon whom the end of the world is come.’
There is likewise in the apostle a certain allegory which, in
fact, pertains especially to our case for the very reason that
the (Manichaeans] themselves are in the habit of presenting
and using it in their disputations. For the same Paul says
to the Galatians:’ ‘For it is written that Abraham had two
sons: the one of a bondwoman, was born according to the
flesh; but he of the free woman was by promise. Which things
are said by an allegory. For these are the two testaments.
The one from Mount Sina, engendering unto bondage, which
is Agar. For Sina is a mountain in Arabia, which hath affinity
to that Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her
children. But that Jerusalem which is above is free: which
is our mother’.

(9) Here, then, those exceedingly wicked men, while they
try to render void the Law, force us to accept those Scriptures.

6 Exod. 32.6.
7 Gal. 122-26.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 401

For they note the saying that they are in servitude who are
under the Law, and this last point they air widely in prefer-
ence to the others:* ‘You are made void of Christ, you who
are justified in the law: you are fallen from grace.’ We grant
all this to be true, and we do not say that the Law is necessary
except to those to whom its servitude is still profitable. For
this reason was the Law well enacted, that men who could
not be recalled by reason from sin had to be forced by such
a law, that is, by the threats and terrors of those penalties
which can be seen by fools. And when the grace of Christ
frees us from these, it does not condemn the Law, but invites
us at times to be obedient to its love, not to be a slave to fear
of the Law. This itself is a grace, that is, a blessing, which
they who still desire to be under the chains of the Law do
not realize has providentially come to them. Paul rightly re-
bukes these as infidels because they do not believe that they
have now been set free through Jesus Christ our Lord from
the servitude to which for a fixed period they had been sub-
jected according to the very just dispensation of God. Hence
that statement of the same apostle:? ‘For the Law was our
pedagogue in Christ.’ He accordingly gave men a pedagogue
to fear, who later gave them a master to love. And yet, in
these precepts and commandments of the Law’® which it is
not now lawful for Christians to use, such as the sabbath
or circumcision or sacrifices or anything of this kind, such

8 Gal. 54.

9 Gal. 3.24. The duty of the ancient Greco-Roman pedagogue was pri-
marily to conduct the child to school and back.

10 In his Retract. 1.14.1, St. Augustine quotes the sentence, ‘And yet in
these precepts . . . quickeneth,’ and then comments: ‘But I have
otherwise explained those words of the apostle Paul, and as it seems
to me or rather as it appears from the very nature of the case, much
more appropriately, in that book which is entitled, De spiritu et lit-
tera; though this sense [that given in the present treatise] is not to
be rejected."
402 SAINT AUGUSTINE

great mysteries are contained that every faithful soul realizes
that nothing is more dangerous than to take whatever is there
literally, that is, according to the word, while nothing is more
healthful than a revelation according to the spirit. Hence the
saying:!' ‘The letter killeth, but the spirit quickeneth’; and
also:*? ‘The selfsame veil, in the reading of the Old Testa-
ment, remaineth not taken away (because in Christ it is
made void). What is made void in Christ is not the Old
Testament, but its veil; that through Christ there may be
understood and, as it were, laid bare, that which without
Christ is obscure and covered over. And at once, to be sure,
the same apostle adds:** ‘But when you shall be converted to
Christ, the veil will be taken away.’ But he does not say, "The
Law will be taken away’ or ‘The Old Testament.’ These,
then, have not been taken away through the grace of the Lord
as though they concealed useless thirgs; rather, there was
removed their covering by which useful things were hidden.
This is the treatment followed in the case of those who stu-
diously and faithfully, not turbidly and rashly, seek the sense
of the Scriptures. A careful demonstration is made of the
order of things, and of the causes of deeds and words, and
of the harmony of the Old Testament with the New, so per-
vading that no tittle is left in disagreement. And among the
figures, too, such hidden riches are found that the resulting
allegories, when interpreted, force an admission of their own
misery upon those who wish to condemn them in advance
rather than to learn them.

Chapter 4
(10) But in the meantime, passing over the depths of

13 2 Cor.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 403

knowledge, let me deal with you as I think I should with
my good friend, that is, as I can, not as I have marveled
that learned men can. There are three kinds of mistakes
according to which men err when they read anything. Let
me speak about them one by one. The first kind is that in
which what is false is thought to be true, though the writer
has thought otherwise. The second kind, not so widespread
but no less harmful, occurs when what is false is considered
true and is so thought because the writer also thought so. The
third is the perception of some kind of truth from the writing
of another, though the writer himself did not understand it. In
this kind there is no little profit; nay, if one considers care-
fully, therein lies the whole, entire fruit of reading. An instance
of the first kind would be to have anyone say and believe, for
example, that Rhadamanthus hears and judges the cases of
the dead for the reason that he has read this in Maro’s poetry.*
Such a one errs in two ways: both because he believes an in-
credible statement, and also because it should not have been
thought that the author believed it. The second one can be
observed in this case: If, because Lucretius’ writes that the
soul is made up of atoms and is after death dissolved into the
same atoms and perishes, anyone thinks that this is true and
ought to be believed. For he is no less wretched who, about
a matter of so great moment, persuades himself of the truth
of what is false, even though Lucretius, by whose books he was
deceived, had this opinion. For what value is it to this man
to be sure about the opinion of an author when he has selected
for himself not one through whom he would escape error,
but one with whom he would go astray? The third class is
exemplified by the following instance: If, having read some
1 Virgil, Aeneid 6.566-569.

2 Roman follower (Ist cent. B. C) of Epicurus. The third book of his

poem On the Nature of Things is especially devoted to the thesis here
mentioned.
404 SAINT AUGUSTINE

passage in his books in which he praises continence,* anyone
should insist that Epicurus has placed the highest good in
virtue, and is, therefore, free from fault. What harm is the
error of Epicurus to this man, even though the former believes
that the highest good of man is bodily pleasure? For the man
has not surrendered himself to so base and vile a sentiment,
and it is for no other reason that Epicurus pleases him than
that he thinks he was free from all improper opinions. This
mistake is not only human, but is often even most worthy of
a man. Suppose I were told about some man I loved that he,
now when bearded, had said in the presence of many that
boyhood and infancy were so pleasant that he even took an
oath expressing his willingness to live in the same way; and
suppose this were so clearly proved to me that it would be
shameful to deny it, I should not seem worthy of censure,
should I, if I thought that, by saying this, he wished to indi-
cate that he was pleased with innocence and with that state
of mind which was a stranger to those pleasures in which man-
kind is enmeshed, and if for this reason I should love him
still more, and more than I loved him previously, even if what
he had foolishly loved in the years of boyhood was a certain
freedom in playing and eating and an idle leisure? Suppose
that he had died after I had heard this, so that I could not
by questioning find out his real sentiments. Would there be
anyone so base as to be angry with me for praising the man’s
purpose and intention through those very words which I had
heard? Even a just critic would doubtless not hesitate to
praise my opinion and my intention in that I had been pleased
with innocence, and, as one man about another, I had pre-

3 St. Augustine may have had in mind some such document as the ‘Letter
to Menoeceus (handed down under the name of Epicurus, 4th-3rd
cent. B. C): W. J. Oates, The Stoic and Epicurean Philosophers (New
York 1940) 30-33.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 405

ferred to think well in a matter of doubt even when I could
have thought ill.

Chapter 5

(11) Such being conditions and distinctions that affect
reading, let me now speak of those that relate correspondingly
to writing; these are necessarily of the same number. For,
either the author writes with profit, and is not profitably under-
stood by some reader; or both [the writing and the reading]
are done without profit; or the reader understands with profit,
while the author has written to the contrary. Of these three sit-
uations, I have no blame for the first, and about the last I am
not concerned. For, neither can I blame the man who through
no fault of his own has been misunderstood, nor can I be
annoyed at anyone being read who has not seen the truth, as
long as I see that there is no harm done to his readers. One
kind, therefore, meets with complete approval, and is, as it
were, entirely without fault, that in which good things have
been written, and also received in good part by the readers.
And yet this kind can still be subdivided into two parts, for
it does not completely exclude error. For it frequently happens
that, when the writer has clearly understood, the reader also
clearly understands, but differently than he, sometimes in a
better sense, sometimes in a poorer sense, and yet with profit.
But when, in the matter of doctrine perfectly aimed at the
good life, we hold the same sense as does he whom we read,
we have truth in abundance, and there is no room anywhere
for falsehood. This kind is for the most part exceedingly rare
when the reading treats of matters that are very obscure; nor
can it, in my opinion, be clearly known, but only believed.
For, from what evidence am I to ascertain the intention of
the man, absent or dead, so that I can swear to it? Even if
he were questioned personally, there would be much that he,
406 SAINT AUGUSTINE

if he were a good man, would conceal as a matter of courtesy.
I think, too, that what sort of man the writer was would be
of little help in understanding the matter itself; yet he is most
creditably believed a good man whose writings have had at
heart the good of the human race and of posterity.

(12) Therefore, I wish these men would tell me in what
class they place the supposed error of the Catholic Church.
If in the first, it is a very serious charge. But the required
defense is not far to seek, for it is sufficient to say that our
understanding is not what they think it is when they attack
us. If in the second class, it is no less serious. But they will
be refuted by the same statement. If in the third class, it is
no charge at all. Come, then, and consider the Scriptures
themselves. Why do they object to the books of the so-called
Old Testament? Is it that they are good, but misunderstood
by us? But they themselves do not accept them. Or is it that
they are neither good nor well understood? Our defense above
is sufficient refutation. Or, perhaps they will speak as follows:
Even though you may understand them in a good sense, they
are still bad. What else is this than to acquit living adversaries
with whom there is a controversy, and to accuse the long
ago dead with whom there is none? Indeed, I believe that
the sacred writers both profitably handed down all things
and were themselves great and divine, and I believe that
it was the command and the will of God that proclaimed and
established that Law. And (though I know very few of this
kind of books) I can easily persuade to my belief anyone who
comes to me with a mind open and free from stubbornness.
This I will do when you give me the opportunity of influenc-
ing your benevolent ears and mind. But this when I can.
Is it not sufficient for me now, in whatever way the matter
stands, not to have been deceived?
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 407

Chapter 6

(13) I call to witness, Honoratus, my own conscience
and the God who dwells in pure minds that I think nothing
is more prudent, more chaste, more worthy of reverence,
than are those writings, all of them, which the Catholic Church
preserves under the name of the Old Testament. You wonder,
I know. For I cannot conceal the fact that once I had been
persuaded far differently. But, surely, there is nothing more
full of rashness (and we boys had no lack of that) than,
whatever books are in question, to desert those expositors who
profess that they can preserve these books and hand them
down to their disciples, and to seek out the opinion of those
who, under I know not what compulsion, have declared a
bitter war against the framers and authors of these books. For,
who ever thought, to speak of teachings in which the reader
may perhaps err without committing sacrilege, that the ob-
scure and recondite works of Aristotle should be explained by
one who was his enemy? And who has ever wished to read
or learn the geometric writings of Archimedes, with Epicurus
as his teacher? Against these the latter argued much and
boldly, but, as I think, with no understanding of any of them.
Or are those Scriptures of the Law of a manifest clarity,
against which, as though publicly exposed, these men make
their attack in vain and with no profit? And they seem to
me to be very similar to that silly woman whom these same
men usually deride: angry because the sun was praised to
her and commended by a certain Manichaean woman as
worthy of worship, and, being very simple-minded in her
religious thinking, she leaped up excitedly and, repeatedly
beating with her foot that spot on which the sun shone as
it streamed through the window, began to cry out—quite
foolishly (who will say otherwise?) and woman-like—‘Lo, I
408 SAINT AUGUSTINE

am trampling on the sun and your god.’ But do not these
men seem to you to be like her in respect to things which
they do not understand—either why they exist or what indeed
their nature is: things which, though apparently of no value,
are still subtle and divine to those who understand them—
they think they accomplish something by tearing them to
pieces with the mighty force of their prayers and imprecations
because they secure the applause of the ignorant? Believe me,
whatever there is in the Scriptures is something lofty and
divine. Truth is there absolutely, and a discipline well adapted
to refresh and renew minds, which is so simply ordered that
everyone can draw thence what is sufficient for his needs if
only he approaches to partake devoutly and faithfully as
true religion demands. To prove this to you, one needs many
reasons and a longer treatise. But I must so deal with you that
first you will not hate the authors; then, that you will love
them. And this I must do in any other way, rather than by
explaining their meanings and words. For, if we hated Virgil
—rather, if we did not love him through the recommenda-
tions of our forebears before we had an understanding of
him, never would we have been satisfied about those innumer-
able questions over which grammarians are generally agitated
and disturbed; nor would we listen willingly to one who re-
solved these questions to the poet's credit, but would favor
him who tried to show, through them, that he had erred and
was off the track. But now, since many are trying to explain
these questions, and each according to his own bent, those
men get the most applause through whose exposition the poet
is found better, one who is believed (even by those who do
not understand him) not only to have erred in no respect,

1 The student will find in the commentaries of Servius (4th-5th cent.
A.D) on Virgil abundant examples of the type of question here
intended.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 409

but to have written nothing save what was praiseworthy.
And so we rather become annoyed at the teacher who fails
in some little question and has no answer to give than think
that he is silent through Maro’s fault. Now if, toward his own
defense, he should wish to assert a defect in so great an author,
it is not likely that his students will stay with him, even
though their fees have been paid. How great a thing it would
be to show similar good will to those through whom so old
a tradition confirms that the Holy Spirit has spoken. But, of
course, we brilliant young men and wondrous searchers-out of
reason, not even having opened those books, without having
looked for teachers, without directing the least accusation at
our own dullness, and, finally, not even conceding an average
understanding to those men who for so long a time had wished
books of this kind to be read and guarded and expounded
throughout the entire world, we thought that no confidence
should be placed in these men; and we were moved to this
opinion by the words of those who were their enemies and
foes and among whom we would be forced to cherish and
believe under the false pretence of reason, untold thousands
of fables.

Chapter 7

(14) But now I will continue what I have begun, if I
can, and thus treat with you, not so as to open up the Catholic
faith in the meantime, but, with a view to scrutinizing its
great mysteries, that, for those who have a care for their
souls, I may show forth the hope both of divine fruit and of
finding the truth. No one doubts that he who seeks true religion
either already believes the soul to be immortal if that religion
is to be of any profit to him, or that it is just that very truth
he wishes to discover in this same religion. It is for the sake
of the soul that all religion exists; for, how it may be with
410 SAINT AUGUSTINE

the nature of the body causes no worry or solicitude, especially
after death, to one whose soul possesses that by which it may
be happy. It is for the sake of the soul, then, either entirely
or most of all, that true religion, if there is any, has been
established. But this soul—I will see for what reason, and I
confess that this matter is very obscure—still wanders and is
foolish, as we see, until it attains and perceives wisdom, and
this perhaps is itself true religion. I am not dismissing you
to idle fables, am I? I am not forcing you to believe anything
rashly, am I? I simply say that our soul, immersed and en-
tangled in error and foolishness, is seeking the way of truth,
if there is any. Pardon me, if this is not true in your case,
and, I beg of you, share with me your wisdom. But, if you
recognize in yourself what I say, then, I pray you, let us
seek truth together.

(15) Suppose that up to the present we have not listened
to the proponent of any religion. Lo, we have entered on a
new task and a new business. We have to seek out, I suppose
the professors of this belief, if it exists. Suppose that we have
found some holding to one opinion, others to another, and, in
the diversity of their opinions, each seeking to draw everyone
to his own side. But among these, let us suppose, certain
ones are preeminent because of the celebrity of their fame
and because they have taken possession of almost all peoples.
Whether they have the truth is a great question. But would
they not have to be investigated first so that, as long as we
are in error, in that we are mere human beings, we may
seem to err with the human race itself?

(16) But among a certain few there is truth. You now
know, therefore, what it is, if you know among whom it is.
Did I not say to you a little while ago that we should make
our search as if entirely uninformed? But, if you infer from
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 411

the very force of truth that a few have it, but you know not
who they are, what then? If those few who know the truth
are such as to hold the multitude by their authority, whence
could that small number, set apart in that multitude, release
itself and, as it were, filter through?’ Do we not see how few
attain to great eloquence, while throughout the world the
rhetorical schools are noisy with throngs of young men? Is
it that all those who wish to develop into orators of value
are terrified by the multitude of the unlearned and think
they should vigorously apply themselves to the orations of
Caecilius or of Erucius rather than to those of Tully?’ The
models that all make for are those that have been confirmed
by the authority of their forefathers. The crowds of the un-
lettered work to learn the very same things which have been
accepted by the few wise men as the things necessary to learn;
very few succeed, fewer actually plead, and still fewer become
famous. But what if the true religion be some such thing?
What if the multitude of the unlearned frequent churches?
Still there is no proof that, therefore, no one has been made
perfect by those mysteries. And yet, if so few were eager for
eloquence as the few that are eloquent, never would our
parents have thought that we should be entrusted to such
masters. Since we have been invited to these studies by the
multitude (which, in large number, is ignorant), so that we
might become enamored of what few can attain, why are we
unwilling that our case be similar in religion, which, per-
chance, we are rejecting at great risk to our soul? For, if the
truest and most sincere worship of God, even though it exists

1 The interpretation here adopted of this difficult passage is largely based
on that of D. Bassi (transl. 46 n.l, 48 n.l).

2 In comparison with Cicero (Tully) the two orators here named had
small reputation. For Erucius, see Quintilian, Inst. Orat. 8.3.22; for
Caecilius (Ὁ. Caecilus Metellus), Cicero, Brutus, 21.18 and Horace
Satires 2.1.67.

412 SAINT AUGUSTINE

only among a few, still exists among those with whom the
multitude, however entangled in lusts and far removed from
pure understanding, is in agreement—and who can doubt
that this is possible?—I ask, if anyone should accuse us of
rashness and foolishness in that we do not carefully search
out among its own teachers that which it is a matter of great
interest to us to find, what could we reply? That the multitude
deterred me? Why did it not deter me from the study of the
liberal arts, which scarcely contribute anything to this present
life? Why not from the search for money? Why not from
attaining honor? Why not, finally, from securing and main-
taining good health, and, last of all, why not from the very
pursuit of happiness? Yet, these are interests in which all are
busy, though few excel.

(17) But those seemed to be absurd statements. Accord-
ing to whose assertion? According, of course, to that of those
who are our enemies for whatever cause or reason—and this
is not now the question—yet enemies still. Whenever I read,
I learned through myself. Is this true? Without being imbued
with some poetic training, you would not venture to take
up Terentianus Maurus without a teacher.’ Asper, Cornutus,
Donatus, and countless others are required so that any poet
can be understood whose verses are seen even to capture the
applause of the theater. But, against books which, however
they may be, are reported by the acknowledgment of almost
the entire human race to be holy and full of diyine things,
you yet launch your attack without a guide, and you dare to

3 The four authors mentioned here would have been well known to St.

Augustine the rhetorician. Of Terentianus Maurus (end of 2nd cent.

B. C) there survives a manual on prosody and metrics. Of about the

same period is Asper, commentator on Terence, Sallust, and Virgil,

while the Stoic Cornutus (Ist cent. A. D.) , who taught the poets Lucan
and Persius, was also a commentator on Virgil. Donatus (ith cent.

D), a teacher of St. Jerome, wrote authoritatively on grammar
and commented on Terence and Virgil.

THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 413

pass sentence upon them without a teacher! And, if anything
appears there which seems absurd, you do not accuse your
own dullness and your own intellect, corrupted, like that of
all the foolish, by the filth of this world, but rather those
books which, perhaps, are simply unintelligible to such minds
as yours. You should seek out someone both good and learned,
or one who would be considered such by common consent,
that through his teachings you might become better and more
learned by his instruction. Such a one was not easily found?
Let toil, then, be expended upon the search. There was no
one in the land in which you lived? What purpose should
more profitably send you traveling? He was in perfect hiding
on the continent, or else did not exist? A sea voyage should
then be taken. If he were not to be found on the nearby
shores across the sea, you should go on even to those lands
in which the deeds contained in those books are said to have
taken place. What have we done of this kind, Honoratus?
And yet what was perchance (for I am still speaking as
though it were a matter of doubt) the holiest of religions,
whose renown has taken possession of the entire world, has
been condemned by the arbitrary judgment of us miserable
boys. What if those matters which are seen to offend some
ignorant souls in these same Scriptures were put there for this
purpose, that when there should be read matters abhorrent
to the feelings of ordinary men, not to speak of the prudent
and holy, we should much more studiously look for an inner
meaning? Do you not see how men try to interpret the Cata-
mite of the Bucolics from whose mind passed all thought of
the rough shepherd?‘ And how they insist that the boy Alexis,
on whom Plato is also said to have written an amatory poem,*
4 Virgil, Eclogues 2.

5 For amatory verses on Alexis attributed to Plato, see J. M. Edmonds,

Elegy and Iambus (Loeb Classical Library) 1L (London-New York
1981) 8-9.
414 SAINT AUGUSTINE

has some great significance or other which escapes the under-
standing of the unlettered?—and all this when no sacrilege is
involved in holding a very fertile poet as author of lascivious
songs.

(18) But, actually, were we recalled and prohibited from
investigating, either by the sanction of some law, or the power
of our adversaries, or the base character of consecrated persons
or a shameful report, or the newness of the institution, or a se-
cret promise? By none of these. All the divine and human laws
permit one to seek out the Catholic faith. To hold and exercise
it is certainly permitted by human law, even if there is, as long
as we err, a doubt concerning one divine law. No enemy terri-
fies us in our weakness—(although, if truth and the salvation
of the soul, diligently sought after, have not been there found
where this can be done with safety, they ought to be pursued
at any risk) ; all ranks of dignities and powers are devoted to
the service of this divine worship; eminently honorable and dis-
tinguished is the name of religion. What hinders one, then,
from examining thoroughly and investigating in a devout and
careful inquiry whether this is that which necessarily but
few know and guard in all its integrity, even if the good will
of all people conspires in its favor?

(19) Since all this is so, suppose that, as I have said, we
are now for the first time trying to find the religion to which
we should surrender our souls to be cleansed and renewed.
Undoubtedly, we would have to begin with the Catholic
Church, for there are now more Christians than there are
Jews and pagans combined. But of these same Christians, al-
though there are many heresies, and all wish to appear Catho-
lic and call the others, themselves excepted, heretics, there is
one Church, as all grant. If one considers the entire world,
this Church embraces a larger proportion of the common peo-
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 415

ple, and, as those who know affirm, is also more sincere in truth
than all the others. But the question about truth is another
question. What is sufficient for those in search of it is that there
is one Catholic Church to which different heresies give differ-
ent names, since they are all called by their own distinctive
titles which they dare not deny. From this, with judges who are
hindered by no favors passing judgment, it can be understood
to which is to be attributed the name Catholic which all seek
to gain. But, that no one may think that this is to be made the
subject of loquacious or superfluous discussion, there is cer-
tainly one Church in which, in a certain way, human laws
themselves are also Christian. I do not want any decision to be
made from this in advance, but I do judge this a very oppor-
tune point at which to begin the investigation. For the fact
that the true worship of God, relying on no strength of its own,
should seem to have to be supported by those whom it ought to
support should not be a matter for fear. But certainly it will be
a matter of perfect happiness if truth can be found there where
it can with greatest security be both searched for and held; if
it cannot, then, at length, it should be approached and ex-
amined thoroughly elsewhere at any peril whatsoever.

Chapter 8

(20) Now that these principles have been established,
which, as I think, are so just that I ought to win this case with
you in the face of any adversary, let me relate to you, as best
I can, the method I used in seeking true religion in the spirit
in which I have just explained it should be sought. For as I
left you and crossed the sea, now delaying, now hesitating, as
to what I should hold and what I should discard (for my
vacillation kept ever increasing from day to day from the time
416 SAINT AUGUSTINE

that I heard that man! who, as you know, had been promised
at his coming as one sent from heaven to solve all our difficul-
ties, and found him, except for a certain eloquence, just like
the others), I planned and deliberated much, now that I am
established in Italy, not as to whether I should remain in that
sect into which I now regretted having fallen, but in what way
the truth had to be found—that truth for which I longed with
sighs to no one better known than to you. Often it seemed to
me that it could not be found, and the mightly billows of my
thoughts were carried on to favor the Academics. Often again,
to the utmost of my capacity, gazing into the human mind, so
full of life, so keen in perception, and so discerning I thought
that the truth lay in no wise hidden except in the way it should
be sought, and that this same way would have to be taken from
some divine authority. It remained to find out what that
authority was, since in such great dissensions every one prom-
ised that he would deliver it. Thus there grew up before me a
forest yielding no way of escape and into which I was loath to
force my way; amid these circumstances my mind was unceas-
ingly disturbed with the desire of finding truth. I kept turning
away more and more from those whom I had already de-
termined to abandon. In such perils there remained no other
alternative than to implore the help of Divine Providence with
tears and piteous supplications, and this I did unremittingly.
And now some disputations of the Bishop of Milan’ had almost
moved me to wish to inquire, not without soine hope, into
many things concerning the Old Testament itself, on which,
as you know, we used to invoke curses as it had been ill com-
mended to us. And I had determined to be a catechumen in
1 Undoubtedly the Manichaean bishop and doctor, Faustus, with whom
St. Aes deals in Conf. 5.3 ff. (in 5.5 the followers of Faustus
are said to regard him as The Holy Spirit of God) , and against whom

he published a tremendous work in 33 books (his Contra Faustum) .
2 St. Ambrose. See Conf. 5.13-14; 6.3.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 417

the Church to which my parents had committed me until I
should either find what I wanted or convince myself that the
search need not be made. Had there been one who could teach
me at that time, he would have found me very ready and
docile. In this and similar ways let there be a care for your
soul. Long have you also seen yourself affected,’ and if now you
think you have been tormented enough, and you wish to put an
end to sufferings of this kind, follow the path of Catholic teach-
ing which has come down to us from the apostles through
Christ Himself, and will continue hence to posterity.

Chapter 9

(21) You say that this is ridiculous, whereas all profess to
hold and teach this doctrine. All heretics profess it, I cannot
deny, but so as to promise those whom they entice that they
will give them a reason for things that are very obscure. And
they especially accuse the Catholic Church that it commands
its adherents to believe, while they boast that they do not im-
pose the yoke of believing on their followers, but rather reveal
the source of their teaching. What, you say, could have been
said which would more redound to their praise? But this is not
so. For they do this not through any endowment of strength,
but to conciliate a certain large group under the name of
reason. At this promise, the human soul naturally rejoices, and
without considering its own strength and health, by trying
to get the food of the strong, which is unwisely prescribed ex-
cept for the strong, it rushes right in to the poisons of the de-
ceivers. For unless those things are believed, which later, if he
has succeeded and been worthy, each one attains to and

3 For this clause and the foregoing sentence the Maurist text provides
basis for a somewhat smoother rendering: ‘If you have long seen your-
self also in this position, affected by a like care for your soul, and if
you now think . . .

418 SAINT AUGUSTINE

perceives, and without a certain weighty power of authority,
true religion cannot at all be rightly entered upon.

(22) But you ask, perhaps, for some explanation on this
very point which would convince you that you ought not be
taught first by reason and only then by faith. This can easily
be done if only you are fair. But so as to do it with advantage,
I wish you to reply to me as though I were questioning you.
First of all, tell me why you think one should not believe. Be-
cause, you say, credulity itself, from which the credulous get
their name, seems to me to be somewhat of a fault; otherwise
we would not be in the habit of bringing up this term as a
matter of reproach. For, if a suspicious man is at fault in that
he suspects what has not been ascertained, how much more
the credulous soul, who differs from the suspicious man in this,
that the one allows some doubt in matters unknown to him;
the other, none. But you know that we are not wont to call
a man even curious without some reproach, but we call one
studious even with praise. Therefore, please note what seems
to you to be the distinction even between these two. You will
surely answer that though each is moved by an intense desire
to know, still, the curious man inquires into things which have
no reference to him at all, while the studious man, on the con-
trary, investigates what concerns himself. Now we do not deny
that to a man belong his wife and children, and their welfare:
And if someone living in a foreign country should carefully
question all newcomers as to the health and well-being of his
wife and children, such a one would surely be influenced by an
intense desire to know; yet we do not call studious this man
whose desire of knowing is both very great and directed toward
matters which most especially concern him. Therefore, you
now understand that your definition of a studious person has
this weakness: while every studious soul does indeed wish to
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 419

know those matters which refer to himself, still, not everyone
who does this should be called studious, but rather he who with
utmost zeal seeks that which tends to the liberal cultivation
and enrichment of the mind. Yet we may rightly call him one
who studies, especially if we add what he studies to hear. For
we can call him even studious of his own [family], if he loves
only his own [relatives]; yet, unless we make some addition,
we do not think him worthy of the name studious. And I would
not call a man studious of hearing who was eager to hear how
his own family were, unless, in his joy at the good report, he
wished to hear it again and again; but even if he wished to
hear it only once, I would call him one who studies. Turn now
to the curious person and tell me—if anyone should listen will-
ingly to a tale which would be of no value to him at all, that
is, one relating to matters of no concern to him, and did this in
no offensive way nor often, but very rarely and moderately,
either at a dinner or in some other group or meeting—would
he seem to you to be curious? I think not, but in listening will-
ingly he would surely seem to have some care for that matter.
Therefore, the definition of a curious person also has to be
corrected. For why also should not he who at some time sus-
pects something be unworthy of the name suspicious, and,
similarly, he who at some time believes something be unde-
serving of the name credulous? And so, just as there is a great
difference between one who studies something and one who is
absolutely studious, and again, between one who has some
care for a thing and one who is curious, so likewise is there a
difference between one who believes and one who is credulous.

Chapter 10

(23) But now consider, you will say, whether in religion
we ought to believe. For even if we concede that it is one
thing to believe, another to be credulous, it does not follow
420 SAINT AUGUSTINE

that there is no fault in believing in religious matters. What if
it be a fault to believe and to be credulous, as it is to be drunk
and to be a drunkard? One who holds this view as certain, it
seems to me, could have no friend. For, if it is base to believe
anything, either he acts basely who believes a friend, or, in not
believing a friend at all, I do not see how he can call either
him or himself a friend. Here you will perhaps say: I grant
that at times we have to believe something; now, explain how
in religion it is not base to believe before one knows. I shall do
so, if I can. Therefore, I ask you which you consider the more
serious fault: to transmit religion to one unworthy or to believe
what is said by those who transmit it? If you do not understand
whom I am speaking of as unworthy, I mean one who ap-
proaches it with hypocrisy in his heart. You grant, as I think,
that it is much more blameworthy to reveal whatever sacred
secrets there are to such a man than to believe religious men
who make some affirmation about religion itself. For no other
answer would be becoming to you. So now, suppose that he
is present who is going to transmit religion to you; how will
you convince him that you approach with the right spirit, and
that there is no guile or deceit in you as far as this matter is
concerned? You will say with your own good conscience that
there is no deceit in you, and you will assert this with what
words you can, but still with words. For as a man you would
not be able to reveal to a man the inner recesses of your soul
so as to be completely known. But if he said: Yes, I believe
you; is it not fairer that you also believe me, if I hold any
truth, since you are about to receive and I am about to bestow
a benefit on you?—what answer shall we give, save that you
must believe?

(24) But, you say, would it not be better for you to give

me the reason so that I might follow, wherever it should lead,
without any rashness? Perhaps it would be. Since it is so im-
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 421

portant that you must come to the knowledge of God by reason,
do you think that all men are capable of grasping the reasons
by which the human mind is led to understand the divine,
or are many capable, or just a few? A few I think, you say. Do
you believe that you belong to this number? It is not my place,
you say, to answer this. Therefore, you think he should believe
you in this, also. And this, of course, he does. Please remember
that he has already twice believed you when you said some-
thing uncertain, and that you are willing not even once to
believe him when he advises you on religious matters. But
suppose that it is so, and that you are approaching with the
right attitude to receive religion, and so are one of the few men
capable of understanding the reasons by which the divine
power is known with certainty—what then? Do you think that
the rest of men, who have not been endowed with so serene
a nature, should be denied religion? Or should they be brought
gradually by certain steps to those innermost mysteries? You
see clearly which way is the more religious. For neither can it
seem to you that any man whatever, in his eagerness for so
great a thing, should in any way be deserted or rejected. But
you will agree, will you not, that unless he first believes that
he will arrive at the [goal] which he has set for himself, and
shows the mind of a suppliant, obeying certain important and
necessary precepts, and completely purging himself by a cer-
tain way of life, he will not in any other way attain to that
which is pure truth? Surely you agree. What then about those
(and I now believe that you belong to this class) who can very
easily, with sure reasoning, accept the divine mysteries? Will
it hinder them at all if they come the way which those who
believe first of all come? I think not. But still, you say, what
need is there for them to delay? Because, if by so doing they
will in no way harm themselves, yet they will harm others
by their example. For there is scarcely anyone who has a just
422 SAINT AUGUSTINE

estimate of his own powers. He who thinks too little of him-
self should be roused, while he who thinks too much should be
checked, the former that he may not be crushed by despair,
the latter that he may not be carried on headlong in his bold-
ness. And this is easily done even if those who are strong
enough to fly are forced for a little while, in order not to
incite anyone to danger, to walk on a way that is also safe for
others. This is the foresight of true religion; this has been
divinely commmanded; this has been handed down to our
blessed forefathers; this has been kept even to our own day. To
desire to pervert and disturb it is nothing else than to seek a
sacrilegious way to the true religion. As to those who do this,
even if their desires are granted, they cannot arrive whither
they intend. For, whatever kind of excellent ability they may
have, unless God is present, they creep along the ground. And
He is then present when those who tend toward God have at
heart the interests of human society. No surer way to heaven
can be found than this step. And I, indeed, cannot resist this
reasoning, for how can I say that we should believe nothing
without knowledge? For there is also no friendship at all unless
something is believed which cannot be demonstrated by posi-
tive reasoning. Masters, without any fault on their part, often
believe the stewards in their service. But in religion what can
be more unjust than that the ministers of God should be will-
ing to believe us when we promise sincerity, while we are
unwilling to believe them when they issue precepts? Lastly,
what can be a more healthful way than first to become fitted
for the reception of truth by believing those things which have
been divinely appointed for preparing and cultivating the
mind in advance? Or, if you are already perfectly fitted, [what
can be more healthful than] to go the round-about way where
it is safest to enter, rather than to be a source of danger to
yourself and an example of rashness to others?
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 423

Chapter 11

(25) Therefore, it now remains to consider in what way
these men are not to be followed who promise to guide us by
means of reason. For we have already said how we can, with-
out fault, follow those who order us to believe; but to these
sponsors of reason some men think that they can come, not only
without censure, but even with some measure of praise. But
this is not so, for there are [only] two [classes of] persons in
religion who are praiseworthy:! the one consists of those who

1 CE. Retract. 1.14.2; ‘I also said, "There are two classes . . . sure to ar-
rive." In these words of mine, if those "who have already found," whom
we have declared to be "already in actual possession,” are understood to
be most blessed in the sense that they are so, not. this life, but in
that which we hope for and to which we aim by the way of faith, the
sense is interpreted without error. For they should be judged to have
found the object of their search who are already in that place in
which we desire to arrive, by seeking and believing, that is, by keeping
the way of faith. But, if they are thought to be or to have been most
blessed in this life, this does not seem to me to be true: not that
absolutely no truth can be found in this life which the mind can dis-
cern unless it be accepted on faith, but because, whatever it is, it is
not so great as to make us most blessed. For what the Apostle says: “We
see now through a glass in a dark manner:” and, “now I know in part”
(1 Cor. 13.12). cannot be discerned by the mind; it is seen clearly, but
does not yet make us most blessed. That makes men blessed which, he
says, we shall know “then face to face,” and which “then I shall know
even as [ am known” '(ibid.) . Those who have found this object should
be said to be in possession of the beatitude to which leads the way of
faith we keep, and whither, by believing, we desire to arrive. But the
great question is who are those most blessed who are already in pos-
session of that to which our way leads. There is no question as to the
holy angels—they are surely there, But there is a question as to whether
we can go so far as to say that saintly men, now departed, stand in
that possession. They have already been divested of the corruptible
body, which weighs down the soul; but they still await, these also, the
redemption of their own bodies, and their flesh rests in hope, and is
not yet glorified with the incorruption that is to come. But whether
they can, nevertheless, contemplate truth with the eyes of the heart,
“face to face,” as it is said, cannot be discussed here for lack of space.
To the same beatitude, should likewise be referred my words “for the
understanding of deep and honorable, nay even divine matters is a
most blessed thing.” For whatever can be known in this life, however
much it be, is not yet perfect beatitude, since what remains unknown
is by far an incomparably larger amount.’

424 SAINT AUGUSTINE

have already found out, and whom one necessarily judges most
blessed; the other, of those who are seeking very studiously and
in the most correct way. The first kind, then, is already in ac-
tual possession, while the other kind, is on the way, by which,
finally one is most sure to arrrive. There are three other kinds
of men, definitely worthy of censure and aversion. One consists
of those who have opinions, that is, those who think that they
know what they do not know; another is made up of those
who realize that they do not know, but do not seek in such a
way as to find; the third, of those who neither think they know
nor wish to seek. There are likewise three things bordering on
each other, as it were, in the minds of men which are worthy
of distinction: understanding, belief, and opinion. And if these
are considered separately, the first is always without fault;
the second is at times faulty; and the third is never without
fault. For the understanding of deep and honorable, nay even
divine, matters is a most blessed thing." The understanding of
superfluous things, however, is not harmful, but perhaps the
learning was harmful in that it took up the time of necessary
matters. And as to harmful matters themselves, the misery is
not in the failure to understand them, but in the doing or
suffering them. For, if someone should understand how an
enemy can be slain without any danger to himself, he is not
guilty through the understanding itself, but through the evil
desire. And, if this desire is absent, what can be said to be more
innocent? But belief is then blameworthy, either when some-
thing is believed about God which is unworthy of Him, or
when, in the case of man, such belief is too readily held. But
in other matters, if anyone believes something, but with the
understanding that he does not know it, there is no fault. For I
believe that wicked conspirators were once put to death

2 For the author's remarks on this sentence, see the end of the preceding
note.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 425

through the valor of Cicero, and yet, I not only do not know
this, but I even know for sure that there is no way in which
1 can know it. But opinion is very base for two reasons: both
in that he who has convinced himself that he already knows
cannot learn (even if it were possible for the thing to be
learned), and the very rashness is of itself a sign of a mind
ill disposed. For, even if anyone thinks he knows that fact
which I mentioned about Cicero, although nothing prevents
him from learning it (for the matter itself cannot be held
through knowledge), still, because he does not understand
that there is much difference between grasping something by
the sure reason of the mind,” which we call understanding, and
entrusting it, with profit, to tradition or writing for posterity
to believe, he surely errs; and no error is without its baseness.
What we understand, accordingly, we owe to reason; what we
believe, to authority; and what we have an opinion on, to
error. But everyone who understands also believes, and every-
one who has an opinion believes, too; but not everyone who
believes understands, and no one who merely has an opinion
understands. Therefore, if these three capabilities be referred
to the five kinds of men which we have mentioned previously,
that is, the two classes deserving approval (which we put first) ,
and the other three faulty, we find that the first class, consist-
ing of the blessed, believes truth itself, but the second, made up
8 Cf. Retract. 1.14.8: ‘And my statement “there is much difference be-
tween grasping something by the sure reason of the mind, which we call
understanding, and entrusting it, with profit. to tradition or writing for
posterity to believe,” and a little later, “what we understand, accord-
ingly, we owe to reason, what we believe to authority" is not to be so
taken that, in an ordinary conversation, we should fear to say we know
what we believe on the authority of suitable witnesses. Strictly speaking,
to be sure, we say we know only that which we grasp with. the firm
reason of the mind. But when we use words according to their com-
mon usage, just as even divine Scripture does, we should not hesitate
to say that we know both what we perceive with our bodily senses and

what we believe on the evidence of reliable witnesses, provided however
we ave aware of the distinction between the two.’

426 SAINT AUGUSTINE

of those who seek after and love truth, believes authority; in
both these classes, belief is praiseworthy. In the first of the
faulty kinds, that is, in those who think they know what they
do not know, there is surely faulty credulity. The other two
objectionable kinds believe nothing, that is, those who seek
truth with no hope of finding it, and those who do not seek
it at all. And this is true only of things which refer to some
system of knowledge. For in other activities of life, I truly
know not how a man can believe nothing. Although even
among those who say that in practice they follow the more
probable, they yet prefer to seem unable to know rather than
unable to believe. For who does not believe what he approves
of? Or how is it that what they follow, if it is not approved
of, is probable? Truth, therefore, has two kinds of adversaries:
the one consisting of those who oppose only knowledge, not
faith; the other, of those who reject both; yet I truly do not
know whether they can be found in the (normal] activities of
man. We have said this in order to understand that, by retain-
ing our faith in those things which we do not yet grasp, we
have been set free from the rashness of such as have opinions.
For, those who say that we are to believe nothing, except what
we know, are on their guard against the one name of opinion,
which, one must admit, is a low and wretched one. But, if
they consider carefully that there is a very great difference be-
tween, on the one hand, thinking one knows and, on the other,
believing, under the influence of some authority, what one
realizes he does not know, they would surely avoid errors and
the charge of inhumanity and pride.

Chapter 12

(26) For, I ask, if what is not known need not be believed,
how are children to be subject to their parents? And how are
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 427

they to love with mutual affection those whom they do not
believe to be their own parents? For this cannot in any way
be known through reason, but is believed of the father on the
authority of the mother; but, as to the mother herself, it is not
she, for the most part, that is believed, but midwives, nurses,
and servants. For cannot she from whom a son can be stolen
and another substituted, having been deceived herself, deceive
others? Yet we believe, and we believe without any doubt,
what we admit we cannot know. For who would not see that,
unless this were so, filial devotion, the most sacred bond of the
human race, would be violated by a most grievous sin of pride?
For who, no matter how crazy he were, should think one ought
to be blamed for fulfilling his duties to those whom he believed
to be his parents, even though they were not? Who, on the
other hand, has not judged that man deserving of exile who,
perhaps, loved his real parents very little, lest he might love
counterfeit parents? Many examples can be cited which show
that absolutely nothing would remain intact in human society
if we should determine to believe only what we can grasp by
perception.

(27) But, now, listen to something I trust you will more
easily accept. When the matter at stake is religion, that is, the
worship and knowledge of God, those men are less to be
followed who forbid us to believe and readily promise reason.
For no one is in doubt that all men are either fools or wise."

1 Cf. Retract. 1.14.4: ‘Likewise, my statement, “No one is in doubt that
all men are either fools or wise men” may appear to contradict what
is read in the third book of De libero arbitrio, "as though human
nature admits of no middle state between folly and wisdom." "But that
statement was made in relation to a question as to whether the first
man was made wise or foolish or neither; we could in no way call him
a fool since he was created faultless, and folly is a serious fault; and
how we could call wise a man who could be seduced was not clear. And
so, for brevity's sake, I decided to say “as though human nature admits
of no middle state between folly and wisdom." I was thinking of
infants; though we confess that they bear original sin, yet strictly we
428 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Now, I call wise not the gifted and witty, but those in whom
there is, in as far as it can be in man, a knowledge, grasped
with surety, both of man and of God, and a life and habits in
accord with this knowledge. But others, whatever may be their
skills or lack of skills, whether their way of life is approved of
or not, I would count in the number of the fools. Since this is
so, what man of average intelligence has not clearly seen that
it will be more useful and healthful for the fools to obey the
precepts of the wise than to live according to their own judg-
ment? For, every deed, if it is not rightly done, is a sin; nor can
one in any way do rightly what does not proceed from right
reason. Moreover, right reason is virtue itself. For, to what
human being is virtue readily at hand save to the wise man?
The wise man alone, therefore, does not sin. And every fool,
then, sins save in those acts in which he obeys the wise man.
From right reason, then, such acts spring, nor is a fool to be
considered, so to say, master of his own deed, since he is, as
it were, the instrument and agency of the wise man. Therefore,
if it is better for all men not to sin than to sin, surely all fools
would live better lives if they were subservient to the wise.
And, if no one doubts that this is true in matters of lesser im-
port, as, for instance, in buying or tilling a field, in marrying
a wife, in acknowledging” and bringing up children, and even
in the control of household property, it is all the more true in
religion. In the case of human events, fine distinctions can be
made more readily than in the case of divine; and in things

can not call them either wise or foolish, since they do not yet use their
free will either for good or for evil. But in the present passage I said
that all men are either wise or foolish, wishing those to be understood
who already have the use of reason (by which they are distinguished
from cattle) so as to be men; just as we say that all men wish to be
happy. Are we to fear that in this statement, so true and obvious.
children (who have not yet the power to desire this) will be included?
‘This meaning for suscipere (‘lift up’) is based on the Roman practice
of susceptio, by which a father acknowledged a child as his own by
lifting it up.

"»
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 429

more sacred and extraordinary, we sin so much the more
impiously and dangerously in that we owe them greater ser-
vice and devotion. You see, therefore, that nothing remains to
us, as long as we are fools, if our hearts are set on a good and
religious life, except to seek out the wise; by obeying them, we
can become less conscious of and eventually escape altogether
the foolishness which dominates us as long as it remains within
us.

Chapter 13

(28) Here, again, a very difficult question arises. For
how will we fools be able to find a wise man? Even if only a
few dare to claim this title openly, yet many do so indirectly
by so differing among themselves on those very things in the
knowledge of which wisdom consists, that either none of them
is necessarily wise, or but one. But when the fool tries to find
out who that one is, I do not at all see how he can clearly
distinguish and know him. For there are no signs whatever by
which one can recognize something, unless he knows the thing
itself of which these are the signs. And, of course, the fool does
not know wisdom. For, though one is allowed in the case of
gold and silver and other things of that kind to recognize them,
at sight, without possessing them, not so can wisdom be seen
by the mental eye of one who lacks it. Whatever we touch by
bodily sense is offered to us from without, and that is why
we can distinguish with our eyes things foreign to us, though
we ourselves possess nothing of them or of their kind. But
what is grasped with the intellect is within the mind, and hav-
ing it is equivalent to seeing. But the fool lacks wisdom;
accordingly, he does not know wisdom, nor can he see it with
his eyes, for he cannot see it without possessing it, nor can he
have it and be a fool. He does not, therefore, know it, and,
not knowing it, he cannot recognize it elsewhere. Accordingly
430 SAINT AUGUSTINE

as long as anyone is a fool, he cannot be completely sure of
finding a wise man through whom, if he obey him, he can be
freed from so grevious an evil as foolishness.

(29) For this immense difficulty in our search for religion,
then, only God can supply the remedy. And, unless we believe
that He exists and assists human souls, we ought not even
look for the true religion itself. For what, I pray, do we desire
to investigate with such great effort? What do we wish to
reach? At what do we want to arrive? Is it to that which we
believe does not exist and does not pertain to us? Nothing
is more perverse than such an attitude. Though you would
not be so bold as to ask me a favor (at least you would do so
impudently), unless you. believed that I would grant it, yet
you come asking to find a religion, while at the same time
you think that either God does not exist, or, if He does exist,
that He has no care of us. What if the matter is so important
that it cannot be found unless it be sought out diligently, and
that with all our might? What if the extreme difficulty of
finding is an exercise for the mind of the inquirer, leading
to the full grasp and diffusion of the discovery? For what is
more joyful and familiar to our eyes than the light of day?
And yet, after prolonged darkness men cannot suffer or en-
dure it. What is more beneficial than food and drink to a
body worn out with illness? But we see that convalescents are
restrained and checked so that they may not venture to give
themselves over to the full plates of the healthy, and thus
use food itself in such a way as to fall back into the disease
which was depriving them of it. I am speaking of convales-
cents. Again, as to the sick themselves, do we not urge them
to take something? In this, surely, they would not obey us
at so great discomfort if they did not believe that they were
going to recover. When, then, will you give yourself to this
burdensome and laborious investigation? When will you ven-
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 431

ture to impose on yourself as much care and concern as the
matter deserves, if you do not believe that the object of your
search exists? Rightly, then, has it been set down by the
majestic teaching of Catholicism that prospective converts
should be convinced of [the value of] faith before all else.

Chapter 14

(30) And so (for our discussion is, indeed, about those
who wish to be called Christians) what reason, I pray, does
that heretic advance? Why should he recall me from believing
as though it were a rash act? If he commands me to believe
nothing, then I do not believe that this true religion itself
anywhere exists in human life. And, when I do not believe
that it exists, I do not search for it. But he, as I think, intends
to point it out to the inquirer, for it has been written:! ‘he
that seeketh, findeth.' I would not come, therefore, to a man
who forbids me to believe, if I did not believe something. Is
there any greater insanity than that I should displease him
by faith alone, which rests on no knowledge, when faith alone
led me to him?

(31) Again, what about the fact that all heretics urge
us to believe in Christ? Could they be in a more self-contradic-
tory position? There is here a twofold way in which they
should be pressed. First, they should be asked where is the
reason which they kept promising? Where their rebuke to
rashness? Where their assurance of knowledge? For if it is
base to believe any one without reason, what are you waiting
Íor? What are you busy about? That I may believe someone
without reason so that I can more easily be influenced by your
reason? Or is it that your reason will build a strong super-
structure on a foundation of rashness? I say this according to

1 Matt. 7.8.
432 SAINT AUGUSTINE

those whom I displease by believing. For I not only judge
it most healthful to believe before using reason (since one
is unfitted to comprehend reason), and, with faith itself, to
prepare the ground to receive the seeds of truth, but I believe
that such is the way, generally, by which safety can alone re-
turn to sick souls. Since this seems to them a matter for ridicule
and one of utter rashness, surely they are impudent in suggest-
ing that we believe in Christ! Next, I confess that I already
believed in Christ and accepted what He said as true, even
when my belief was unsupported by reason. Is this the first
principle by which you will guide me, O heretic? Let me con-
sider with myself a little in what men I believed concerning
Him (since Christ Himself as He willed to appear to men I did
not see, He who is said to have been seen even by the eyes of
the common crowds), so that, already equipped with such
faith, I now draw near to you. I see that I have believed no one
except the affirmed opinion and the widespread report of
peoples and nations, and that the mysteries of the Catholic
Church have everywhere taken possession of these peoples.
Why, then, should 1 not most preferably seek among them,
with all diligence, for Christ’s teachings, since it was under
the influence of their authority that I already believed that
Christ had taught something profitable? Will it be from you
that I am to receive a better explanation of what He said,
when I would have no belief in His existence, past or present,
if it had been you who had commended this doctrine to my
belief? In this matter, as I said, I believed a report which
had the strength of numbers, agreement, and antiquity. And
everyone knows that you, so few in number, so confused, and
so new, offer nothing that has the dignity of authority. What,
then, is that violent insanity of yours? Believe them that you
must believe in Christ, and learn of us what He said. Why,
I ask you? For, if they failed and could not teach me any-
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 433

thing, I could much more easily convince myself that it was
not necessary to believe in Christ than that I could learn any-
thing about Him save from those through whom my faith in
Him had come. O tremendous confidence! Or rather, tremen-
dous folly! I teach you the precepts of Christ in whom you be-
lieve. What if I did not believe in Him? You could not, could
you, teach me anything about Him? But, he [the man] says,’ it
is proper for you to believe. You do not mean that I should
believe in Him on your recommendation, do you? No, he
says, for we guide by reason those who believe in Him. Why,
then, should I believe in Him? Because the report is well
founded. Has this come about through you or through others?
Through others, he says. Shall I, then, believe in them so
as to be a pupil of yours? Perhaps I ought to, had not these
men warned me especially not to approach you at all. For
they say that your doctrine is a dangerous one. You will
reply: they are liars. How, then, shall I believe them about
Christ whom they have not seen, and yet not believe them
about you, whom they are unwilling to see? Believe that which
is written, he says. But in the case of all writing that presents
something new or unheard of, or that is commended by a
few, without the support of reason, credence is given not to
it but to those who bring it forward. Therefore, if, few and
unknown as you are, you bring forward these writings, one
is not inclined to believe them. Likewise, too, contrary to
your promise, you are exacting faith by a command rather
than by using reason. Again, you will call me back to the
large numbers and the judgment of many. Restrain, I pray
you, your stubborn persistence and that, I know not what,
2 In the remainder of this paragraph, St. Augustine sometimes puts

the argument of his opponent in the third person, using inquit,

though at times he continues to use the second person. The apparent

confusion disappears if one recognizes that both the second person
and third person refer to the same opponent, the heretic.
434 SAINT AUGUSTINE

untamed desire of handing down your name; rather, urge me
to seek the chief men of this multitude, and that with the
utmost labor and toil, so that I may learn something from
them about those writings but for whose existence I should not
know that I had to learn at all. Do not return into your
hiding places, and do not lay snares in the name of truth
which you are trying to take away from those whose authority
you yourself acknowledge.

(32) But, if they say that we are not even to believe in
Christ, unless they can give a reason that cannot be doubted,
then they are not Christians. This is what certain pagans say
against us, foolishly indeed, but not at variance with them-
selves or inconsistently. But who can bear to have these men
profess to belong to Christ when they contend that nothing
should be believed without their showing to fools a complete
disclosure of reason as it concerns God. But we see that He
Himself, so far as that history teaches which they themselves
acknowledge, desired nothing more or more strongly than to
be believed; they, on the other hand, with whom He had to
deal, were not yet fit to receive the secrets of God. For what
other purpose had His miracles, so numerous and so stupen-
dous? He Himself said that He worked them for no other rea-
son than that He might be believed. By faith He guided fools;
you guide them by reason. He cried out to be believed; you
cry out against it. He praised those who believed in Him;
you revile them. Either He turned water into wine*—not to
mention other miracles—while men could imitate Him in no
such prodigy (though they could follow Him in His teaching),
or that statement of His is to be considered of no value:‘
‘You believe in God, believe also in me,’ or that man is to
be accused of rashness who did not wish Him to come to

3 John 27-9.
4 John 14.1.
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 435

his home, but believed that the illness of his son would go
away at His command alone.’ Therefore, applying the med-
icine which was to heal the most corrupt customs, through
His miracles He gained authority, through His authority He
won faith, through faith He drew the multitude, through
the multitude He got possession of antiquity, and through
antiquity He strengthened religion. And this in no way can
be torn asunder, either by the most foolish novelty of heretics,
working through fraud, or even by the inveterate error of
nations, violently struggling against it.

Chapter 15

(33) Therefore, even if I cannot teach, yet I do not
cease to admonish. Since many wish to seem wise, and it is
not easy for fools to recognize whether or not they are wise,
I bid you pray to God with full intention and all prayers,
with groans and even with tears, if possible, to free you from
the evil of error, if your heart is set on a happy life. And
you will find this more easily, if you willingly obey His pre-
cepts, the commands which He willed to strengthen by such
weighty authority as that of the Catholic Church. Since a
wise man is so closely united to God in mind that nothing
intervening can separate him, for God is truth and one is
not at all wise unless his mind is in contact with truth—we
cannot deny that there is between the foolishness of man and
the very pure truth of God a certain mean, the wisdom of
man. For the wise man imitates God to the extent of his en-
dowment. But for the fool there is nothing closer for him to
imitate sanely than a wise man. And since it is not easy to
recognize him through reason, as has been said, it was neces-
sary to present certain miracles to the very eyes (which fools

5 Matt. 8.8; Luke 7.6-7.
436 SAINT AUGUSTINE

use much more readily, than they do their minds), so that,
moved by authority, men’s lives and habits might first be
purged, and thus become amenable to the acceptance of rea-
son. Since, then, it had to be that man be imitated, and yet
that hope be not placed in him, what could have been done
more indulgently and generously by Divine Providence than
that the very Wisdom of God, pure, eternal, unchangeable,
to whom we needs must cling, should deign to take upon
Himself manhood? And His purpose was not only to do that
which would invite us to follow God, but also to suffer that
which was deterring us from following God. Since no one can
attain the surest and most supreme Good, without loving it per-
fectly and completely (and this is not possible as long as there
persists any fear of bodily or chance ills), He won our love by
His wondrous birth and His miracles, and He banished fear
by His death and resurrection. But in all other things He
showed Himself such (and it would be tedious to pursue this
in detail) as to enable us to see how far divine mercy could
be extended and to what heights human weakness could be
elevated.

Chapter 16

(34) This is, believe me, the healthiest authority; this is
the first way of uplifting our souls from their dwelling on
earth; this is conversion to the true God from the love of this
world. It is authority alone that moves fools to hasten on to
wisdom. So long as we cannot understand pure truth, it is
indeed wretched to be deceived by authority. But surely it is
more wretched to be unmoved by authority. For, if the Pro-
vidence of God does not preside over human affairs, there is
no point in busying one’s self about religion. But if both the
outward appearance of all things (and they surely must be be-
lieved to come from some spring of purest beauty) and some, I
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 437

know not what, inner conscience exhorts all better souls, both
publicly and privately as it were, that God is to be sought and
served, we must not give up hope that God has established
some authority, on which, if we rely, just as on a sure step,
we will be raised up to God. But, laying aside reason, which
in its purity is very difficult, as we have said, for fools to under-
stand, this authority moves us in two ways, that is, by miracles,
and by the crowds who follow it. No one of these is necessary
to the wise man. Who denies the fact? But this is now our
concern—that we be able to be wise, that is, to cling to
truth. Surely, the sordid soul cannot do this. And the sordid-
ness of the soul, to sum it up briefly, is love of anything what-
soever save the soul and God; in so far as anyone is more
completely freed from these vices, he will the more easily
gaze on truth. But it is surely perverse and preposterous to
wish, then, to see truth in order to purge out the soul, since
it is purged out for this very purpose that one may see. And
for a man that cannot see the truth, authority is at hand to
make him fit for this, and to allow him to purge himself. And
no one doubts, as I said before, that authority prevails, partly
through miracles, partly through the crowds that accept it.
And I call a miracle anything which appears arduous or un-
usual, beyond the expectation or abilities of the one who mar-
vels at it; of which kind there is nothing better suited for the
people and in general for fools than what affects the senses.
Such acts, again, are divided into two classes: there are certain
ones which only evoke wonder, and there are certain others
which win great favor and good will. For, if anyone should see
a man flying, in that the act would yield no advantage to the
spectator beyond the sight itself, he would only marvel. But
if anyone, afflicted by a serious and hopeless disease, should,
at a command, at once regain his health, love for the one
who healed him will transcend his wonder at the cure. Such
438 SAINT AUGUSTINE

were the miracles wrought at that time when God appeared
(so far as sufficed for His purpose) to men as the True Man.
The sick were healed. The lepers were cleansed. To the lame
power to walk was restored; to the blind, sight; and to the
deaf, their hearing. Men of that day saw water changed into
wine, five thousand fed to satiety with five loaves, seas trav-
ersed by foot, and dead men arise. So, certain miracles had
regard for the body, by a more apparent benefit, certain others
for the soul by a more hidden token, and all of them for
men, in bearing witness to His majesty. Thus, divine authority
then turned the wandering souls of men to itself. Why, you
ask, do such things not occur now? Because they would not
move people, unless they were miraculous, and, if they were
customary, they would not be miraculous.’ For consider the
changes of day and night, the very constant order of heavenly
bodies, the fourfold change of the seasons, the fall of leaves
and their return to the trees the following spring, the infinite
power in seeds, the beauty of light, and the varieties of colors,
sounds, smells, and tastes; and then give me a man who
sees and experiences these things for the first time, with whom
we can still talk—he is amazed and overwhelmed at these
miracles, But we have little respect for all these things, not
because of the ease with which we know them (for what is
more obscure than their causes?) but surely because we con-
stantly experience them. Those miracles were wrought, then,
very opportunely, so that authority might effectively influence
the habits of the multitude, which, through the miracles, had

1 Ct. Retract. 1.14.5: ‘In another place when I had mentioned the works
which Jesus Christ did when He was here in the flesh, I went on to say,
“Why, you ask, don't such things occur now?" And I replied, “Because
they would not move people unless they were miraculous; and if they
were customary, they would not be miraculous.” I said this because
such great miracles are no longer worked, nor all kinds—not because
none at all are worked even now.’
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 439

been brought together, and then (after witnessing them) were
sent out far and wide.

Chapter 17

(35)) But habits of any kind are so strong in their pos-
session of the minds of men that, even in the case of those that
are evil (and these usually come from the dominant passions),
we can more quickly condemn and detest them than we can
abandon or change them. Do you think that there has been
little regard for men, in that not only many learned men
maintain in argument but also a multitude of unlearned men
and women among them and such different classes of people
both believe and assert that one should worship as God
nothing earthly, nothing fiery, nothing which can touch the
bodily senses, but that He can be reached only by the intellect?
And what about the fact that self-restraint even leads to a
very slim diet of bread and water? that fasting lasts not for
the day only, but for several days in succession? that chastity
is carried even to a rejection of marriage and a family? that
patience endures even to the setting at naught of crosses and
flames? that generosity leads even to the distribution of family
estates to the poor? and that, lastly, contempt for everything
of this world stretches out even to a desire for death? Few
practice these [heroic virtues], and fewer practice them well
and wisely. And yet, [when they are practiced], nations ap-
prove, nations applaud, nations favor, and, finally, nations
love such men. And, not without lifting up their minds to
God or without certain sparks of virtue, nations acknowledge
that it is due to their own weakness that they cannot do
these things. This is the work of Divine Providence, achieved
through the prophecies of the prophets, through the humanity
and teaching of Christ, through the journeys of the apostles,
through the sufferings, the crosses, the blood and the death
440 SAINT AUGUSTINE

of the martyrs, through the admirable lives of the saints, and
in all these, at opportune times, through miracles worthy of
such great deeds and virtues. When, then, we see so much
help on God’s part, so much progress and such fruit, shall
we hesitate to bury ourselves in the bosom of that Church?
For starting from the apostolic chair down through succes-
sions of bishops, even unto the open confession of all man-
kind, it has possessed the crown of authority. And the heretics
who lurked around her in vain were condemned, in part by
the judgment of the people themselves, in part by the weighty
decisions of the councils, and also in part, by majestic miracles.
To be unwilling to grant this Church the first place is surely
the mark either of the height of impiety or of inconsiderate
arrogance. For, if souls have no sure way to wisdom and health
unless faith first prepares them for reason, in what else does
ingratitude for divine help and assistance consist than in the
wish to resist an authority endowed with so mighty a force?
And if any system of thought, however lowly and easy, needs
a teacher or a master if it is to be understood, what is more
indicative of rash pride, in all its fullness, than to refuse to
learn the books of the sacred mysteries from their own inter-
preters and to venture to condemn them unknown?

Chapter 18

(36) Therefore, if either our reasoning or our speech has
moved you at all, and if you have a real interest in your own
welfare, as I believe you have, I would like you to listen to
me, and to entrust yourself with devout faith, eager hope,
and simple charity to the good teachers of Catholic Christian-
ity, and not to stop praying to God Himself, by whose good-
ness alone we were created, by whose justice we are punished,
and by whose mercy we are set free. Thus, you will have the
teachings and disputations of men who were both learned and
THE ADVANTAGE OF BELIEVING 441

truly Christian, books also and calm thoughts, too, whereby
you may easily find what you seek. But abandon completely
those long-winded and wretched men (what gentler phrase
might I have used?) who in their intensive search for the
source of evil find nothing but evil. And in this inquiry they
do indeed often stir up their listeners to ask questions, but,
when they have them fully roused, they so teach them that
it would be better to sleep forever than in this way to be
awake. They make them frantic instead of drowsy; between
these sicknesses, each of which is generally fatal, there is still
this difference, that the drowsy die without violence to others,
but the frantic are an object of dread to many in sound
health and most of all to those who wish to succor them. For
God is not the author of evil; He has never repented of any
of His actions; He is not troubled by any stormy disturbance
of the soul; His kingdom is not a little portion of the earth;
He does not approve of nor does He command any sin or
wickedness; and He never deceives. For these notions, and
others similar to them, disturbed us as they brandished them
before us in their mightly attacks and falsely charged that this
was the teaching of the Old Testament; all of which is utterly
false. And so I grant that they were right in censuring these
notions. What then have 1 learned? What do you think ex-
cept that when those notions are attacked, the Catholic system
of teaching is not. And so 1 hold what truth I had learned
from them; what I had considered false, I reject. But the
Catholic Church taught me many other things, also, to which
those men, bloodless of body but heavy of mind, cannot aspire,
that is, such truths as: God is not corporeal; no part of Him
can be seen with the eyes of man; He cannot in any way
either in His substance or in His nature suffer violence or
change, and He is neither a composite being nor one that
has been made. And if you grant me these truths (for we
442 SAINT AUGUSTINE

cannot think otherwise about God), all their contrivances
have been overturned. God did not beget or create evil;
neither is there nor has there ever been any nature or substance
which God did not beget or make; and yet nevertheless He
frees us from evil. How all this comes about is proved by
arguments so compelling that no one can possibly doubt,
above all you and men like you, if to a good disposition are
added faithful devotion and a certain quiet of mind, without
which there can be no understanding whatever of such great
matters. And here there is no talk out of thin air,’ based on
some Persian tale or other to which it is sufficient to lend an
ear and a mind by no means subtle, but absolutely childish.
Far indeed, far different is the truth, not as the Manichaeans
say in their folly. Since this discourse, however, has gone much
further than I intended, let us end the book here. And in it,
I want you to remember, I have not yet begun to refute the
Manichaeans; I have not yet attacked their triflings, nor have
I revealed anything of importance about the Catholic Church
itself. I only wished to take from you, if I could, the false
notion about true Christians which was taught to us out of
malice or ignorance, and to rouse you up to learn certain great
and divine truths. Let this volume, therefore, be what it is.
And when your soul becomes calmer, I shall perhaps be more
ready to discuss other things.” AMEN.

1 The literal expression here used (‘a tale from smoke’) may be based
on some now undocumented proverb similar to that in which ‘selling
empty smoke’ meant making empty promises (e.g. Martial 4.5.7). The
Persian origin of Manichaeism is alluded to in the following phrase.

Cf. Retract. 1.14.6: ‘But the end of the book reads: "But since this dis-
Course ... other things." I did not say this as though I had not yet
written anything against the Manichaeans, or committed anything
about the Catholic doctrine to writing, since so many volumes, issued
previously, bear witness to the fact that I had not been silent on either
topic. But in the book written to him, I had not yet begun to refute the
Manichaeans, I had not yet attacked their triflings, nor had I revealed
anything important about the Catholic Church itself, because I hoped,
that after this start, I should write him what had here not been written.

D

INTRODUCTION

THOUGH On Faith in Things Unseen is one of St.
Augustine’s minor writings, its finished style shows
the masterful construction, lucid presentation of
ideas, and beauty of expression so characteristic of most of
what he wrote. It is also a typical example of St. Augustine’s
apologetical style of argument and his appeal to prophecy.

Because of its omission from the Retractationes and the
Indiculum of Possidius, On Faith in Things Unseen long was
considered spurious. The Louvain theologians had relegated
this work to the place of a supplement, in their edition of
St. Augustine, basing this censure on the opinion of Erasmus,
who had even believed it to be a writing of Hugh of St.
Victor. The Benedictine editors refuted this conjecture in
stating that one manuscript of the work, that of the Codex
Gemmeticensis,! was discovered which antedated Hugh of St.
Victor and which made formal mention of St. Augustine as
author. Moreover, the matter treated and the discourse are
characteristic, not of Hugh, but of Augustine. A comparison
of the content of this work with St. Augustine's treatment of
the same matters in his other writings reveals marked similar-
ity in ideas and their actual expression.

Finally, and the Benedictine editors remark that ‘this must
have escaped Erasmus’ notice,’ St. Augustine himself testi-

1 From the abbey of Jumiéges, now preserved in the Municipal Library
of Rouen, MS A286 (472).

445
446 SAINT AUGUSTINE

fies that this is his work in Epistola 231, to Count Darius,
with these words: ‘I also sent you other books, though you
did not ask for them, that I might not do only what you
asked; {they are] On Faith in Things Unseen, On Patience,
On Continence, On Providence, and a large one, Faith, Hope,
and Charity,’

On Faith in Things Unseen is generally considered to have
been written after the year 399. Before that year, in which
the Emperor Honorius passed laws against idolatry, St. Au-
gustine’s reference (7.10) to the abandonment of false gods,
the conversion of their temples to other uses, and the ex-
tirpation of pagan rites and customs, would have had little
point. On the other hand, in this work the author quoted
Holy Scripture not acording to the Vulgate, but from the
Old Latin versions. This proves that it was not written in the
latter part of his life, when he began to adopt St. Jerome’s
translation of the Bible.

Because of the phrase, ‘my dearly beloved’ (8.11), it is
probable that the work was preached as a sermon. Its purpose
is to refute that crass empiricism which would admit no faith
in the truths of revelation because they cannot be ‘seen,’ that
is, perceived by our sensory experience.

Chapters 1-2 (sects. 1-4) present St. Augustine’s philosoph-
ical argument for the necessity of admitting the reality of
things unseen in everyday human relations. He shows that
our experience of love, friendship, and other values is not
based on what we perceive by the senses, but on an interior
act, an immediate vision of our mind. This quality of the
human mind, by which we grasp, and give assent to, intel-
ligible truths, axioms, and values, elsewhere plays an impor-
tant role in Augustinc’s theory of knowledge, ever since he
wrote his Answer to Skeplics (Contra Academicos). He was
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN 447

to develop this theory fully in the ninth book of his great
work, The Trinity.’

In chapters 3-4 (sects. 5-7) Augustine proceeds to the
demonstration of theological faith. He takes up the further
objections of empiricists, namely that mental knowledge of
things unseen is always based on inference from outward
signs and indications. But, in the case of supranatural faith,
such signs and indications are given in the marks of holiness
of the Church, visible here and now, as they have been fore-
told in Scripture.

Furthermore, from this demonstration of things present and
visible (the Church) we are entitled to conclude also to
the truth of the invisible mysteries of faith, past (regarding
Christ) and future (regarding the Last Judgment), as pre-
dicted in the Old Testament. The Jews, who have these
books, yet in their blindness do not believe, are being pre-
served by God as a permanent exhortation to Christians to
be strong in the faith. Finally, the visible victory of the
Gospel over the pagan world would not have been possible
unless we believe the invisible mystery: that Christ is God
who became man.

Like other sermons of St. Augustine,’ On Faith in Things
Unseen abounds in certain rhetorical figures, especially in
compound sentences whose parts are parallel in structure but
opposite in meaning (antithetical parison); and in clauses
with the same verbal ending (antistrophe, homoioteleuton).
Not all these fine points of style could be retained in trans-
lation without doing violence to the English language.

2 For the early beginnings of his doctrine, see J. Geyser, in M. Grabmann
and J. Mausbach, Aurelius Augustinus (Kóln 1930) 63-86. A brief
explanation on De Trinitate 9 appears in V. J. Bourke, Augustine's
Quest of Wisdom. (Milwaukee 1915) 210 f.

3. E. Norden, Die antike Kunstprosa (3rd ed. Leipzig 1918) 2.616 £.,

448 SAINT AUGUSTINE

In the absence of a more recent edition of On Faith in
Things Unseen, the text used has been that of the Benedic-
tines of St. Maur (3rd Venetian reprint 1797) tome 11, and
Migne, Patrologia Latina 40.171-80. As to the Scriptural
passages, the differences between the Old Latin text quoted
by St. Augustine and the Vulgate are relatively unimportant
for the purpose of the present translation; the Douay version
of the Vulgate has therefore been adopted.

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY

Texts:
Benedictines of Saint Maur, Tome II (3rd Venetian reprint 1797) .
J. P. Migne, Patrologia Latina 40, 171-80.

Secondary Works:
V. J. Bourke, Augustine’s Quest of Wisdom (Milwaukee 1945).
J. Geyser, Die erkenntnistheoretischen Anschauungen Augustins zu
Beginn seiner schriftstellerischen Tátigkeit in Grabmann-Maus-
bach, Aurelius Augustinus (Kéln, 1930)
CONTENTS

Chapter

1.

The part played by faith in the natural order. Even in
human affairs many things are believed which are not
perceived by the senses .

ing of human intercourse would result were faith in
the unseen removed

natural order Christians have evidence for their belief
in things not seen

accomplished ought to move us to believe those things
which we do not see D m"

. Reasonableness of argument from prophecy. By an ex-

ercise of reason, Christians believe in past things which
they have not seen actually accomplished, and in things
still to be accomplished because they do behold the ful-
fillment at the present time of things prophisied in
the same scriptures ᾿

Jews provide the same attestation to the prophecies
concerning our religion MN

paganism and the marvelous conversion of the peo-
ples to Christianity are an indication of the truth of
what we believe GB o

faith. Those who possess the faith must cherish it and
preserve it unto the end 20.

Page

E gj a n . 451
. The necessity of acceptance of things on faith. A shatter-

0.29 . 453
. Proofs of faith. As in the natural order so in the super-

. 455
. The Fulfillment of prophecy. Things which we do behold

. 464
. Evidence from the books of the Jews. The writings of the

. 465
. Observation of actual occurrences. The extirpation of

. 467

. Exhortation to a firm observance and preservation of the

. 469
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN

Chapter 1

HERE ARE SOME who think that the Christian religion
ought to be ridiculed rather than upheld. The rea-
son for this is that in it, not the thing which may

be seen is set forth, but faith in things which are not seen is
imposed upon men. For the sake of refuting those who,
prudent in their own opinion, seem to be opposed to believ-
ing what they cannot see, we surely have not the power to
present to the eyes of men the divine truths which we believe.
Yet, we do show the minds of men that even those things
which are not seen ought to be believed. Now, as regards
those whom folly has made so servile to the eyes of the body
that they do not think they ought to believe anything which
they do not perceive through those eyes, they ought, in the
first place, to be reminded of how many things there are
which cannot be seen with such eyes—things which they
not only believe, but also actually know.

These things are innumerable in our mind itself, whose
nature is invisible—to say nothing of other things, like the
very faith by which we believe, or the thought process by
which we know either that we believe something or that we
do not believe it, although it may be entirely outside the realm
of those eyes. What is there so bare, so clear, what so cer-
tain to the interior vision of our minds? How, therefore,
must we not believe what we do not see with our bodily eyes,
when we perceive beyond any doubt either that we believe
or do not believe where we cannot employ the eyes of the
body?

451
452 SAINT AUGUSTINE

(2) But, they say, we have no need to learn through
the eyes of the body those things which are in the mind, since
by the mind itself we can perceive them. Moreover, what you
say we should believe you neither show us exteriorly, that
we may acquire knowledge of them through our bodily eyes,
nor are they within the mind, that we may perceive them by
thought. It is, they say, just as if a man were ordered to be-
lieve, if only he could see the object of belief presented before
him. Therefore, surely we ought to believe some temporal
things also, which we do not see, that we may also deserve
to see the eternal things which we believe.

But, whoever you are who will not believe except what
you see, with your bodily eyes you surely see bodies present
to you; your affections and thoughts present to you, because
they are in your own mind, you see with that mind. Tell
me, I ask you, with what eyes do you see your friend's will
toward you? For, no will can be seen with bodily eyes. Or,
indeed, do you also see in your mind that which is taking
place in the mind of another? But, if you do not see it, how
do you, on your part, requite his loving kindness, if you do
not believe what you cannot see?

Or, perhaps you will say that you see the will of another
through his deeds? Then you will see acts and hear words,
but of your friend's will you will believe that which cannot
be seen or heard. The will is not color or figure that may be
impressed upon the eyes; nor is it a sound or formula that
may strike upon the ears; nor, indeed, is it yours to be felt
by the affection of your heart. It follows, therefore, that,
although it is not seen or heard or grasped inwardly by you,
it is believed. Otherwise, your life would be left barren of
any friendship, or love bestowed upon you would not be paid
back by you in turn.

What, then, becomes of that statement of yours that you
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN 453

ought to believe only what you see either exteriorly with the
body or interiorly with the mind? Lo, verily, out of your
heart you believe in a heart that is not yours, and you place
faith where you do not focus the glance of either your body
or your mind. You discern your friend’s countenance by
means of your body; you discern your faith by means of your
mind; but your friend’s faith is not appreciated by you, unless
there is in you a reciprocating faith, by which you may believe
what you do not see in him. It certainly is possible, too, for
a man to deceive by feigning kindness and by cloaking malice.
He even may not plan to do harm—still, by expecting some
advantage from you, he simulates love because he does not
possess it.

(3) But, you say that you believe in a friend whose heart
you cannot see because you have tested him in your trials
and learned of what mind he was toward you in your dangers
when he did not fail you. Does it seem to you, then, that we
ought to desire affliction so that the love of our friends toward
us may be proved? For, no one will be happy with the surest
of friends unless through adversity he has been unhappy;
so that, indeed, he may not enjoy the love of another by
experience unless he is tortured with grief and fear. And how
is it possible, then, for the sake of having true friends, to desire
such happiness, which only unhappiness can prove, and not,
rather, to fear it? It is true that we can have a friend even in
prosperity, but he is proved more surely in adversity.

Chapter 2

But, surely, to prove your friend you would not submit
yourself to your dangers if you did not believe. And since
you thus submit yourself that you may prove him, you believe
before you prove. Certainly, if we ought not to believe in
454 SAINT AUGUSTINE

things not seen, we still believe in the hearts of friends though
these hearts be not yet truly tried; when we have proved
them as good by our misfortunes, we still believe their kind-
ness toward us rather than see it. It is only because our faith
is so great that we decide, not inconsistently, that we see with
its eyes, as it were, what we believe, since we ought to believe
for this reason that we cannot see.

(4) 1f this faith in human affairs is removed, who will
not mark how great will be their disorder and what dreadful
confusion will follow? For, who will be cherished by anyone
in mutual charity, since love itself is invisible, if what I do
not see I ought not to believe? Friendship, then, will wholly
perish, since it rests upon nothing more than mutual love.
What of this will one be able to receive from another, if it
Shall be believed that nothing of it can be shown? Further-
more, when friendship perishes, neither the bonds of marriage
nor of relationship and affinity will be retained in the mind,
because in these, also, there surely is a friendly spirit of har-
mony. Then a husband and wife will not be able to have
mutual affection, since they do not believe that there is any
love, inasmuch as love cannot be seen. Nor will they desire
to have children, for they do not believe that the children
will return their love.’ And, if children should be born and
grow up, the parents themselves will love their own much less,
and they will not see love for themselves in their children's
hearts because love is invisible—if things unseen are believed,
not by praiseworthy faith but by blameworthy rashness.

What shall I say, now, of the other relationships—of broth-
ers, sisters, sons-in-law, fathers-in-law, and of those joined
by any sort of blood-relationship or affinity—if charity is
1 quos reddituros esse non credunt: The MSS. vary here, some reading

credituros; others, reddituros. The meaning is clear whether we say,
“that the children believe them in turn’ or "return [love] to them."
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN 455

uncertain and good will suspected; both the will of parents
by their children and the children’s feelings, likewise, by their
parents; and, if due kindness is not rendered, because it is
not thought to be due, since that which is not seen in another
is believed not to exist? Furthermore, this caution is not ap-
propriate, but rather odious, when we do not believe that
we are loved because we do not see the love of those who
love us, and when we, on our part, do not return love to
others because we think we do not owe them mutual love.
To such a degree are human affairs disturbed, if we should
not believe what we do not see, that they would be completely
overturned if we should refuse belief to all the inner disposi-
tions’ of men which we cannot see with certainty.

I will not mention how much those, who rebuke us for
believing what we do not see, themselves believe of rumor,
or history, or about places where they themselves have never
been; nor how in these instances they do not say: ‘We do
not believe because we have not seen.’ Because, if they say
this, they are compelled to admit that they are uncertain
about their own parents. For, even on this point they have
believed by reports of others—who, in turn, are unable to
demonstrate the fact because the event is already in the past.
Men retain no consciousness of that time, and yet, without
any hesitation they give agreement to what others say about
it. Yet, if this should not be done, a faithless lack of reverence
toward parents would necessarily follow, while a rashness in
placing belief in those things which we can not see is seem-
ingly avoided.

Chapter 3
Therefore, when we do not believe what we cannot see,

2 Here, as elsewhere, Augustine uses the term voluntas (will), with the
connotation of good will, affection, disposition.

456 SAINT AUGUSTINE

concord will perish and human society itself will not stand
firm. How much more, then, ought faith to be placed in
divine things, even if they are not seen. If this faith is not
applied, it is not the friendship of some men which is violated,
but the very essence of religion itself, so that the very depth
of misery results.

(5) But, you will say, although I am not able to see the
kindness of a friendly person toward me, I am able, never-
theless, to trace it by many indications; whereas you, on the
contrary, can show no evidence of those things not seen
which you wish us to believe. Meanwhile [we reply], it is no
little matter that you admit that some things, even some
not seen, ought to be believed through the clearness of certain
manifestations. Thus, it is also established that not all things
which are not seen ought not to be believed, and the state-
ment which holds that we should not believe the things which
we do not see lies convicted and rejected.

They are very much in error who think that we believe in
Christ without any proofs of Christ. For, what evidences are
more clear than those which have been foretold and fulfilled?
Moreover, those of you who think that there are no evidences
which you have not seen whereby you ought to believe in
Christ, mark well the things that you see. The Church her-
self addresses you with the voice of maternal affection:

‘I, whose success and growth throughout the whole world
astonish you, was not always such as you now behold me.
But, “In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be bles-
sed.”* When God blessed Abraham, He gave promise of me;
for, over all nations in the blessing of Christ am I poured
forth. The record of succeeding generations testifies that Christ
is the seed of Abraham. To consider this briefly: Abraham

1 Gen, 22.18.
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN 457

begot Isaac, Isaac begot Jacob, Jacob begot twelve sons, from
whom originated the people of Israel. In fact, Jacob himself
was called Israel. Among these twelve sons he begot Juda,
whence comes the name of the Jews from whom was born the
Virgin Mary who brought forth Christ. And, lo, in Christ,
that is, in the seed of Abraham, you see and marvel that all
nations are blessed. Do you still fear to believe in Him whom
you ought rather fear not to believe?

‘Or do you hesitate or refuse to believe His birth of a
virgin, when you ought rather to believe that thus it was
fitting for God to be born man? Learn that this, too, was
foretold by the Prophet: “Behold, a virgin shall conceive,
and bear a son, and his name shall be called Emmanuel,
which is interpreted, God with us."* You will not doubt, there-
fore, the motherhood of a virgin if you want to believe the
nativity of a God, who does not relinquish the government
of the universe and comes in flesh among men; who bestows
fecundity on His mother,’ yet does not diminish her integrity.

‘Thus, it was necessary for Him to be born as a man,
though as God He always was, that by this birth He might
become God to us. Hence, the Prophet again speaks con-
cerning Him: “Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever, the
scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of uprightness. Thou
hast loved justice and hated iniquity: therefore, God, thy
God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows.’* This is the spiritual anointing whereby God anointed
God, that is, the Father anointed the Son; whence we know
that He was called Christ from that chrism, that is, from the
anointing. I am the Church about which it is said to Him
in the same psalm (and what was yet to be is declared before-

2 Isa. 7.14.

3 matri fecunditatem. afferentem: ie, God (the Holy Spirit) bestows
fecundity on Mary who thus becomes His (the Son's) mother.

4 Ps, 447-8.
458 SAINT AUGUSTINE

hand as if it had been); “The queen stood on thy right
hand, in gilded clothing; surrounded with variety,"* that is,
clothed in the mystery of wisdom,* decorated with a variety
of tongues. Then it is said to me: “Hearken, O daughter,
and see, and incline thy ear: and forget thy people and thy
father’s house. For the king has greatly desired thy beauty,
for he is the Lord thy God. And the daughters of Tyre shall
adore him with gifts, yea, all the rich among the people shall
entreat thy countenance. All the glory of the king’s daughter
is within, in golden borders, clothed round about with vari-
eties. After her shall virgins be brought to the king: her
neighbors shall be brought to thee. They shall be brought
with gladness and rejoicing: they shall be brought into the
temple of the king. Instead of thy fathers, sons are born to
thee: thou shalt make them princes over all the earth. They
shall remember thy name throughout all generations. There-
fore shall people praise thee forever; yea, forever and ever." ""

(6) 1f you do not see this queen fruitful even now in
royal offspring;

If she, to whom was said,* ‘Hearken, O daughter, and
see,’ does not see fulfilled what she heard promised to her;

If she, to whom was said, ‘Forget thy people and thy

5 Ps. 44.10.

6 in sacramento saplentiae: The medieval schoolmen already knew (cf.
St. Thomas, Su». theol. 3.60.1) that the Fathers at times used the
the term sacramentum, not in its technical meaning (sacrament),
but in the broader sense, of any sacrum secretum (rely mystery).
Cf. A. Michel, "Sacrements; DThC 14.1 (1939) 485 ft. In his Enar-
rationes in Psalmos, St. Augustine interprets the same passage (Ps.
44.10) almost by the same words: the 'vestments' of the Church are
"sacramenta doctrinae in lingus omnibus variis! (PL 36.509). See also
ch. 7, sacramentum amoris. (mystery of love) .

Ps. 10.11-18.

The following is a detailed allegorical exposition of the preceding
quotation from Ps. 44.11-18, Many years later, Augustine took up this
interpretation, though in a more elaborate way, in his Enarr. in Psalm.
(PL 36.510-14).

eon
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN 459

father’s house,’ does not put aside the rites of former religions
of the universe;

If she, to whom was said, ‘The king has greatly desired
thy beauty, for he is the Lord, thy God,’ does not everywhere
confess the Lord Christ;

If she does not behold the peoples of the nations pour forth
prayers to Christ and offer gifts to Him, about whom was said
to her, ‘Him shall the daughters of Tyre adore with gifts’;

If the pride of the wealthy even be not put aside, and if
they do not implore aid from the Church, to whom was said,
‘All the rich among the peoples shall entreat thy counte-
nance’;

If He does not recognize the daughters of the king to whom
she was commanded to say, ‘Our Father who art in heaven’ ;°

If she, about whom was said, ‘All the glory of the king’s
daughter is within,’ is not renewed in her saints in the interior
man from day to day,'’—though she also strikes deeply the
eyes of those outside the fold by the shining renown of her
preachers," in their diversity of tongues, as ‘in golden borders
and clothed round about with varieties’;

If, then, she is not afterwards made known by her odor of
goodness in whatever place she is;

And, moreover, if consecrated virgins are not led to Christ,
of whom is said and to whom is said, ‘After her shall virgins
be brought to the king: her neighbors shall be brought to
thee'—and lest they shall seem to be led like captives into
some prison, he says, "They shall be brought with gladness
9 Matt. 7.9.

10 Ct. 2 Cor. 4.16.

11 The MSS. read: quamvis et oculos extraneorum fulgentes fama praedi-
catorum suorum , . . perstringat; the Benedictine edition keeps oculos
fulgentes (she also strikes the shining eyes... ), but suggests that

perhaps fulgente fama should be read. We have followed this
emendation.

460 SAINT AUGUSTINE

and rejoicing: they shall be brought into the temple of the
king’;

If she does not bring forth sons from whom she may have
fathers, so to speak, whom she will establish everywhere as
guides for herself, to whom it is said, ‘Instead of fathers, sons
are born to thee: thou shalt make them princes over all the
earth,’ and to whose prayers she will commend herself as their
mother: for she has been placed before them, yet subject to
them, whence it is subjoined, ‘They shall remember thy name
throughout all generations’;

If it is not on account of the preaching of these same
fathers, wherein they have been mindful of her name with-
out ceasing, that such great multitudes have been assembled
within her, to whom is said, “Therefore shall people praise
thee forever; yea forever and ever’; and if they do not con-
fess to her unendingly in their own tongues the praises of

grace;

Chapter 4

If, finally, these things are not so clearly made manifest
that the eyes of enemies discover no place toward which
they may turn aside, where they are not struck by the
same clearness that they are forced thereby openly to make
confession :

Then, perhaps you speak rightly when you say that no
proofs are pointed out to you whereby you may place belief
even in things which you do not see! But, if these things which
you do see have been long ago prophesied and are now so
manifestly fulfilled; if the very truth makes itself clear to you
by antecedent and subsequent effects, that you may believe
the things which you do not see, then, O remnant of infidelity,
blush with shame at those which you see.
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN 461

(7) ‘Give heed unto me,’ the Church says to you, ‘give
heed unto me whom you see, even though you are unwill-
ing to see. For, those who were believers at that time in the
land of Juda learned of the marvelous Birth of Christ of a
virgin, learned of His Passion, Resurrection and Ascension,
and being present there learned all His divine words and the
deeds firsthand. These things you have not seen: therefore,
you refuse to believe them. Look upon these things, there-
fore; direct your attention to them; reflect upon the things
which you behold, which are not narrated to you as of the
past, nor foretold to you as of the future, but are clearly
demonstrated to you as present.’

Now, does this seem vain or unsubstantial to you, and
do you think that it is either a little or no divine miracle that
all mankind runs its course in the name of One Crucified?
You have not seen what was predicted and fulfilled concern-
ing the human nativity of Christ, ‘Behold a virgin shall con-
ceive and bear a son," but you do see what was predicted
and is fulfilled with regard to the word of God to Abraham,
‘In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed.'?

You have not seen what was foretold about the miracles
of Christ, ‘Come and behold ye the works of the Lord! What
wonders he hath done upon the earth,? but you do see that
which was foretold, "The Lord hath said to me: Thou art
my son, this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me and I
will give thee the Gentiles for thine inheritance, and the
utmost parts of the earth for thy possession.'*

You have not seen what was foretold and accomplished
concerning the passion of Christ, ‘They have dug my hands
and my feet. They have numbered all my bones, and they

1 Isa, 7.14.

2 Gen. 22.18.
EI
4 Ps.

462 SAINT AUGUSTINE

have looked and stared upon me. They parted my garments
amongst them: and upon my vesture they cast lots, but
you do see what was prophesied in the same psalm and is
now manifestly fulfilled, ‘all the ends of the earth shall remem-
ber, and shall be converted to the Lord: and all the kindreds
of the Gentiles shall adore in his sight. For the kingdom is
the Lord's; and he shall have dominion over the nations.'*

Nor have you seen what was predicted and fulfilled about
the Resurrection of Christ in the verses where the Psalmist,
in the name of Christ, speaks of his betrayer and persecu-
tors: "They went out and spoke together to the same purpose:
all my enemies whispered together against me: they devised
evils against me. They determined against me an unjust
word.” And in this, to prove that they accomplished nothing
by killing Him, He adds that He will rise again, saying, 'Shall
he that sleepeth rise again no more?'* And then, a little fur-
ther on, concerning His very betrayer, He spoke through the
mouth of the same Prophet, what is also written in the Gospel,
‘He who ate my bread, hath greatly supplanted me," that is,
has trampled upon me. And He straightway added, ‘But thou,
O Lord, have mercy on me and raise me up again: and I
will requite them." This has been entirely fulfilled; Christ
slept and awakened again, that is, He arose—He who says
by the same Prophet in another psalm, 'I have slept and
have taken my rest: and I have risen up because the Lord
hath protected me."

Truly, this you have not seen, but you do see His Church,

5 Ps.
6 Ps.
7 Ps.
8 Ps. 40.9.

9 Ps. 40.10; John 13.18.
10 Ps. 40.11.

11 Ps. 5.6.

ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN 463

of which in a similar manner it was said and brought to
completion, ‘O Lord, my God, to thee the Gentiles shall
come from the ends of the earth, and shall say: surely our
fathers have possessed lies, a vanity which hath not profited
them."? This, indeed, you do behold, whether you wish to or
not, even if as yet you think that there is, or has been, some
usefulness in idols; however, certainly you have heard the
numerous people of the nations say, after they abandoned or
rejected or shattered these vanities to pieces, ‘Surely our
fathers have possessed lies, a vanity which hath not profited
them. Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no
gods??

And neither will you believe that it was foretold that these
nations would come“ to some place of God, as it has been
said, "To thee the Gentiles shall come from the ends of the
earth." 5 Understand, if you can, that it is unto the God of
the Christians, who is supreme and the true God, that the
people of these nations come, not by walking, but by believ-
ing. For, this same announcement has been made in these
words by another Prophet: "The Lord shall be terrible upon
them, and shall consume all the gods of the earth: and they
shall adore him every man from his own place, all the islands
of the Gentiles."!* One says, "To thee the Gentiles shall come
from the ends of the earth’; the other, "They shall adore
him every man from his own place.’ Therefore, they will not
be required to withdraw from their own place in coming to
Him, because they will find Him in whom they believe in
their own hearts.

12 Jer. 16.19.
13 Jer. 16.1920.

14 gentes praedictas fuisse venturas: Another rendering would be: ‘that
the aforesaid nations were to come . . . .' Both constructions leave

rammatical uneasiness.
15 Jer. 16.19-20.
16 Soph. 2.11.
464 SAINT AUGUSTINE

You have not seen what was foretold and fulfilled concern-
ing the Ascension of Christ, ‘Be thou exalted, O God, above
the heavens,” but that which necessarily results therefrom,
‘And thy glory over all the earth’* you do see. Now, then,
all those things already accomplished and transacted con-
cerning Christ you have not witnessed, but you may not deny
that you do see the things which are taking place here and
now in the Church. We make clear to you that these two
kinds of events have been prophesied. But, we are not able
to point out for your sight that both of them have been ful-
filled, because we have not the power to recall to sight what
is past.

Chapter 5

(8) But, just as by means of tokens or marks which we
do see we believe the good will’ of our friends which we do
not see, so the Church, which is now visible, is a token of
all those past things and a harbinger of future things which
are invisible to us, but which are pointed out in the very
writings in which she herself is foretold. For, when prediction
was made of the past things which can no longer be seen,
and of the present things which can be seen, but not all,”
at that time, none of them could be seen. Then, things pre-
dicted began to happen, from those which have been ac-
complished up to those which are now taking place; thus,
the things which were related concerning Christ and the

17 Ps. 107.6.
18 Ibid.

1 See above ch. 2, n2.

2 The MSS read: . . . quae nunc possunt videri, omnia cum praenunti-
arentur, 'For when prediction was made of all these things, the past
Ones which can no longer be seen, and the present ones which can now
be seen.’ We have preferred the Benedictine emendation: quae nec
possunt videri omnia, cum praenuntiarentur.
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN 465

Church have come to pass, according to their preordained
succession. And to this order belong the prophecies which
similarly have been made concerning things to come: the
day of judgment, the resurrection of the dead, the eternal
punishment of the wicked with Satan, and the eternal reward
of the just with Christ. Why, then, should we not believe those
earliest and latest things which we do not see, when, as wit-
nesses for both, we have things between them which we do see,
and when in the books of the Prophets we hear, or read for
ourselves, that the first and the middle and the last were all
predicted before they took place? Unless, perhaps, unbeliev-
ing men think that those books were fashioned by the Chris-
tians in order that the things which they already believed
might have greater authority and influence, if they should
be considered to have been promised before actually taking
place.

Chapter 6

(9) 1f they suspect this, let them search through the
books of our opponents, the Jews. There they may read these
things which we have mentioned, the prophecies made con-
cerning the Christ, in whom we believe, and the Church,
which we behold from the difficult beginnings of the faith*
up to the everlasting happiness of the Kingdom. When they
read, let them not wonder that the Jews, whose scriptures
these are, do not understand because of the darkness of en-
mity. For, it was proclaimed beforehand by the very same
prophets that they would not understand, because it was nec-
essary for other things to be fulfilled, and by a hidden and
just decree of God, for due punishment to be paid in accord-
lab initio laborioso fidei: Some MSS. add quam tenemus (which we

hold), and some read, ab in. laboriosae fidei (quam ten.) “from the
beginnings of the difficult faith [which: we hold].
466 SAINT AUGUSTINE

ance with their merits. For, indeed, He whom they crucified,
He to whom they gave gall and vinegar—although He was
hanging on the cross—He said to the Father, for the sake
of those whom He would have led from the darkness into
the light, ‘Father, forgive them, for they know not what they
do.” But, for the sake of the others whom He was to abandon
for more hidden causes, He said long before through the
Prophet, ‘And they gave me gall for my food, and in my
thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. Let their table become
as a snare before them, and a recompense, and a stumbling
block. Let their eyes be darkened that they see not; and
their back bend thou down always. Therefore, they roam
about anywhere and everywhere, their darkened eyes a most
remarkable proof for our cause, so that through them our
arguments are upheld at the very time that this same people
is rejected.

"Therefore, it was appointed, lest these arguments should
thus be lost, that this same sect should not be as nothing; but
it was scattered over the earth so that, by carrying about with
it the prophecies of grace conferred upon us, it might every-
where be beneficial to us for a more firm convincing of un-
believers.* Accept that which I am saying in the manner in
which it was prophesied: ‘Slay them not, lest at any time my
people forget thy law. Scatter them by thy power. They
have not been killed, therefore, for this reason, that they
have not forgotten what things were read and heard among
them. For if they should forget entirely the Sacred Scriptures,

2 Luke 23.34.

3 Ps. 68.22-24.

4 Cf. Rom. 11.15,80,32, The mystery of the preservation of the Jews
made St. Paul exclaim: ‘O the depth of the riches of the wisdom ana
of the knowledge of God! How incomprehensible are his judgments,
and how unsearchable his ways’ (ibid. 33) .

5 Ps. 58.12.
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN 467

although they do not comprehend them, they would be killed
according to the Jewish rite itself, because, when the Jews
knew nothing of the Law and the Prophets, they could be of
no avail whatsoever. For this reason they have not been
exterminated, but dispersed; although they themselves do
not possess the faith whence they might be saved, they still
retain in memory that whereby we are aided. They are our
supporters in their books, our enemies in their hearts, our
witnesses in their scrolls.

Chapter 7

(10) Even if no testimonies concerning Christ and the
Church had appeared in advance, ought not the unexpected
illumination of the human race by divine brightness move
every one to believe, when we behold false gods abandoned;
their images everywhere dashed to pieces; their temples razed
or converted to other uses; so many vain rites rooted out
from the most inveterate human traditions; and the one true
God called upon by all classes of people? And this was
brought about by one Man, who was derided by men, seized,
bound, scourged, struck,’ condemned, crucified, and put to
death. For His disciples He chose men who were ignorant,
inexperienced—fishermen and publicans—through whom His
authority should be preserved; men whom He chose as wit-
nesses of His Resurrection and Ascension. And this they
have declared that they saw for themselves, and, filled with
the Holy Spirit, they have proclaimed the Gospel in all
tongues, even those they had never learned. Of those who
heard them, some believed; some, not believing, violently
withstood their preaching.

1 Editors insert exspoliatum (stripped) in place of the expalmatum of
the MSS. The latter word was familiar to St. Augustine.
468 SAINT AUGUSTINE

Accordingly, the faithful have been struggling, even to the
death, for the sake of the truth, not by returning evil for evil,
but by bearing evil patiently; they have been the victors,
not by killing, but by dying. In such a way, then, has the
world been changed to this religion; thus have the hearts
of all been converted, men and women, young and old,
learned and ignorant, wise and simple, mighty and weak, rich
and poor, renowned and lowly. And this Church, spread
throughout all nations, has so flourished that even now no
sect contrary to the Catholic faith, no kind of error, arises
which is so much in opposition to the Christian faith that it
does not affect and strive to boast in the name of Christ.
Indeed, such error would not be permitted to sweep over
the earth, were it not for the fact that the very contradiction
fosters sound discipline. *

How would the Crucified have been able to accomplish
so much, had He not been God who became man, even if
such things had not been foretold through the Prophets? Since
however, so great a mystery of love did have its prophets
and heralds going before, through whose inspired words it
has been announced, and since it did come to pass exactly
as it was foretold, who is so foolish as to say that the Apostles
lied about Christ whom they preached as having come—just
as the Prophets long before had predicted that He would
come, and at the same time had made known future truths
concerning the Apostles, too? Certainly, it was about them
that they had said: ‘There are no speeches nor languages,
where their voices are not heard. Their sound hath gone
forth into all the earth: and their words unto the ends of the
world." And, surely, this we see fulfilled now in the world,
although we have not yet seen Christ in the flesh. Who,

2 Cf. 1 Cor. 11.19.
3 Ps. 184-5.
ON FAITH IN THINGS UNSEEN

therefore, except a man blinded by extreme foolishness, or
hard and unyielding with a strange stubbornness, will not
place faith in the sacred writings which have foretold the
faith of the whole world?

Chapter 8

(11) But, my dearly beloved, you who have this faith
or who have but newly received it, cherish it, and let it in-
crease within you. For, just as the temporal things predicted
so long before’ have come to pass, so also will the eternal
verities that have been promised come about. Let not the
vain pagans deceive you, nor faithless Jews, nor deceitful
heretics, nor those evil Christians who are in the Catholic
Church itself, so much the more harmful because they are
enemies within. And, lest the weak become upset for this
reason, divine prophecy has not passed over it in silence, for,
as a spouse speaking to his beloved in the Canticle of Can-
ticles, Christ speaks to His Church: ‘As a lily among thorns,’
He says, ‘so is my love among the daughters." He did not
say ‘in the midst of outsiders,’ but ‘in the midst of daughters.’

‘He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.^ While the net
which is cast into the sea and gathers together all kinds of
fishes, as the Holy Gospel tells us, is being dragged toward
the shore—that is, the end of the world—let him separate
himself from the bad fishes, in heart, not in body, by chang-
ing his evil ways, not by breaking the holy net; lest those who
are now seen to be the elect be reckoned among the reprobate
and find not life, but eternal punishment, when the great
dividing on that eternal shore shall begin.‘

